© 2021 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2021.3114789
E-ffective: A Visual Analytic System for Exploring the Emotion and
Effectiveness of Inspirational Speeches
Kevin Maher, Zeyuan Huang, Jiancheng Song, Xiaoming Deng,Member, IEEE, Yu-Kun Lai,Member, IEEE,
Cuixia Ma, Hao Wang, Y ong-Jin Liu,Senior Member, IEEE, Hongan Wang, Member, IEEE
Abstract—What makes speeches effective has long been a subject for debate, and until today there is broad controversy among public
speaking experts about what factors make a speech effective as well as the roles of these factors in speeches. Moreover, there is a
lack of quantitative analysis methods to help understand effective speaking strategies. In this paper, we propose E-ffective, a visual
analytic system allowing speaking experts and novices to analyze both the role of speech factors and their contribution in effective
speeches. From interviews with domain experts and investigating existing literature, we identiﬁed important factors to consider in
inspirational speeches. We obtained the generated factors from multi-modal data that were then related to effectiveness data. Our
system supports rapid understanding of critical factors in inspirational speeches, including the inﬂuence of emotions by means of
novel visualization methods and interaction. Two novel visualizations include E-spiral (that shows the emotional shifts in speeches in a
visually compact way) and E-script (that connects speech content with key speech delivery information). In our evaluation we studied
the inﬂuence of our system on experts’ domain knowledge about speech factors. We further studied the usability of the system by
speaking novices and experts on assisting analysis of inspirational speech effectiveness.
Index Terms—Affective visualization, multimodal analysis, speech effectiveness
1 I NTRODUCTION
Effectiveness in speeches has long been a controversial subject. Aristo-
tle began his work Rhetoric by criticizing contemporary experts in the
ﬁeld “the framers of the current treatises on rhetoric have constructed
but a small portion of that art” [1]. While Aristotle focused on per-
suasive speaking, the effectiveness of other kinds of public speaking
remains to be understood on a large scale. Today organizations and
public speaking experts train and coach people to improve their public
speaking ability in various contexts. However, many principles of pub-
lic speaking are yet to be agreed upon, even in speciﬁc contexts such
as speech contests. In certain contexts, a clear metric of success can
be given, and with automated annotation of speech factors, in theory a
system could allow users to systematically understand the inﬂuence of
many factors on the effectiveness of speeches at a large scale.
Currently, while there is support from academic literature that dif-
ferent speaking strategies have important impacts in a variety of ﬁelds,
there is controversy among public speaking experts about the signif-
icance and role of different strategies. Recently published works in
analytical systems have focused on describing speaking strategies of
high level speeches. However, there is a lack of analytical systems that
support evaluation of the effectiveness of speaking strategies. Addition-
ally, existing works cannot determine what strategies are effective and
what are not, since they lack a clear metric of effectiveness.
We propose E-ffective, a visual analytic system for speech experts
and novices to evaluate the effectiveness of speaking strategies. Our
• K. Maher is with Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences and
Tsinghua University. E-mail: kevintmaher@gmail.com.
• Z.Y. Huang, J.C. Song, X.M. Deng, C.X. Ma, and H.A. Wang are with State
Key Laboratory of Computer Science and Beijing Key Lab of
Human-Computer Interaction, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of
Sciences and University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. E-mail:
{zeyuan2020, jiancheng2019, xiaoming, cuixia, hongan}@iscas.ac.cn.
• Y.-K. Lai is with Cardiff University. E-mail: LaiY4@cardiff.ac.uk.
• H. Wang is with Alibaba Group. E-mail: cashenry@126.com.
• Y.-J. Liu is with Tsinghua University. E-mail: liuyongjin@tsinghua.edu.cn.
• K. Maher and Z.Y. Huang contribute equally to this work. C.X. Ma, H.
Wang, Y.-J. Liu are corresponding authors.
Manuscript received xx xxx. 201x; accepted xx xxx. 201x. Date of Publication
xx xxx. 201x; date of current version xx xxx. 201x. For information on
obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to: reprints@ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx
system supports analysis of speech factors that takes into account the
relative success of speeches. The system was designed to provide
intuitive and understandable visualizations for speaking experts and
novices to understand factors in an inspirational speech contest. In
our work we seek to investigate speech effectiveness in a user centered
approach. The contributions of E-ffective include:
• A visual analysis system supporting analysis of speech effec-
tiveness. The system allows public speaking experts and novices
to explore speech effectiveness in a systematic way that ﬁts with
mainstream theory on public speaking. The system was designed
to support understanding given moderate visualization literacy of
speaking experts and novices. Veriﬁcation of the understanding
of effective speaking patterns as well as the utility of our system
was tested in user trials.
• Novel techniques of expressive visualization.New visualiza-
tion methods were developed to assist users to further understand
critical factor data. These include a spiral-like graph for indicat-
ing emotional ﬂuctuations, as well as a method for displaying key
information in speech texts.
• Analytical insights based on an inspirational speech dataset.
We utilize algorithms and visualization methods to identify what
factors are indicative of effectiveness. From the evaluation, we
reveal the ability of the system to assist users to examine their
existing hypothesis about speech factors as well as to generate
new hypothesis based on large scale data.
2 R ELATED WORK
2.1 Effectiveness of Speeches
There is disagreement from public speaking experts and academics
about what techniques and theories support effective speeches. In
the 20th century various scholars sought to better understand effective
communication combining manual annotation of speech metrics and
quantitative analysis [3,13,20]. Speech effectiveness has been measured
in a number of ways that include recall-comprehension, attitude change,
and the perceived credibility of the speaker [11].
Many of the public speaking principles in common use today origi-
nated from these studies, even if they are misapplied. Possibly the most
famous statistic related to communication is Mehrabian’s research [19]
that states “7% of communication comes from spoken word, 38%
1
arXiv:2110.14908v2  [cs.HC]  29 Oct 2021
Fig. 1. Our E-ffective system supports understanding and exploring the effectiveness of different factors in public speaking in 4 views. (A) The view of
factors summarizes different factors extracted from the video and p-values calculated by ordinal regression. (B) The view of all speeches contains 5
sub-views that show the distributions of all speeches. (C) The view of the selected speech supports exploring the visualizations of an individual
speech. (D) The view of the selected speech context shows related information about the contest time, place and result (for speech contest videos).
comes from speech tone and 55% comes from body language.” La-
pakko noted the widespread misuse of this research in public speaking
textbooks. Still other researchers diametrically opposed applying this
research to public speaking, “the fact is Professor Mehrabian’s research
had nothing to do with giving speeches ... I have no doubt that the verbal
(what you say) must dominate by a wide margin.” [32] Among public
speaking experts, the role of each speech factor is just as disputed as the
relative contribution of different factors in effectiveness, as shown by
our research survey in Sect. 4.3 of supplementary material. Academic
research and speaking experts often have different conclusions. In a
book written by a past champion of the World Championship of Public
Speaking, the author claimed a general rule is to “use ... short sentences
to express your message.” [7] However, an academic study of educa-
tional videos concluded that “the complexity of the sentences is higher
than the ones in the less popular videos.” [17] Finding out whether
public speaking rules can be generalized to different contexts, such
as different audiences or speaking purposes, and evaluating supposed
rules of public speaking effectiveness could potentially be achieved by
an analytic system with sufﬁcient data.
Automated analysis of speaking data can allow for understanding of
the effectiveness of speeches in different contexts. Recently a few works
have dealt with assessing speech effectiveness. In terms of winning and
losing results in a speech contest, Fuyuno et al. [9] focused on studying
face rotation angle and speech pause data as correlated to speech contest
winners. Ramanarayanan et al. [24] automated scoring of multimodal
speech data in terms of multiple dimensions of effectiveness. Kravvaris
et al. [17] used YouTube’s automated data extraction in speeches.
Outside of academia, experts in public speaking have written books
on how to win speech contests, and claim to understand the most
important factors for effectively winning such competitions. Emotion
is considered crucial in published books of speech contest winners
and led to a world champion giving the deﬁnition of a speech at the
competition as “an emotional rollercoaster ride for the speaker and
his audience.” [14] In their work, experts in these competitions advise
candidates how to plan the emotions in their speeches. A different world
champion advises: “Speeches that focus on only one or two emotions
risk disengaging the audience. . . the most effective choices are anger,
disgust, fear, happiness, love, sadness, and surprise.” [7] Claims by such
speech experts about the effectiveness of emotion in speech outcomes
have yet to be assessed by quantitative methods. In addition to a survey
of literature, in Sect. 3.1 we interview speech experts to determine
emotional factors considered important for effectiveness.
2.2 Analysis Systems Supporting the Understanding of
Speaking Effectiveness
To better evaluate different factors in public speaking, visual analytical
tools have been developed that allow for large scale understanding.
Wu et al. [31] developed a system that allowed users to understand
posture, gesture, and rhetoric in TED videos, allowing users to “help
gain empirical insights into effective presentation delivery.” Zeng et
2
© 2021 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2021.3114789
al. [34] developed a system that explores emotional coherence which
has a case study where experts help teach how to “express emotions
more effectively.” These systems focus on describing different patterns
of emotions in speakers considered to be high level. However there is a
lack of analytical systems that focus on a clear metric for measuring
success, and thus give insight into what differentiates more successful
speeches. Claims by speech experts outside of academia as well as
predicted patterns made by speech experts in our user survey can be
empirically evaluated with our system. In the past,
much work was done by small scale manual annotation to understand
speech effectiveness data. Our system extends insights from large scale
analysis to public speaking novices and experts.
2.3 Emotion Visualization
Visual analysis has been shown to provide valuable insights into emo-
tional speech data. Recently several works have created novel visual
analysis techniques aiming for presenting emotional data that provide
meaningful insights. New visual forms were developed to show chang-
ing group emotion [33] and emotional coherence [34] in an intuitive
way.
As we will later show, emotional data is critical to the effectiveness
in the speeches we study. We created visualizations to express several
critical metrics in a way designed to be intuitively understandable to a
non-expert audience.
3 D OMAIN -CENTERED DESIGN
We adopted a domain-centered design procedure to investigate the
comprehension of effective strategies in the domain of public speaking.
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce how we conducted interviews among
public speaking experts. Next, we summarize their opinions into overall
goals, and the design tasks of the system.
3.1 In-Depth Interviews
We conducted initial in-depth interviews with public speaking experts
in order to analyze what factors they thought were critical to speech
effectiveness, as well as to establish design requirements for an interface
that supports their comprehension. We focused our studies on the World
Championship of Public Speaking, which in some years has claimed to
be the world’s most popular speech contest.
The seven experts we interviewed were all professional public speak-
ing trainers that deliver courses for preparing for speech contests. Six
of the seven had participated multiple times in the World Championship
of Public Speaking. The interview was semi-structured, with all par-
ticipants asked to list possible critical factors to study. They were also
prompted with factors surveyed from literature, to obtain their opinion
on the importance and role of the factors on contest effectiveness. Con-
sistent with literature, all experts thought that the emotion of speakers
would have important impact on the outcome of the contest. Among
the factors they listed, there are factors that we did not include in our
research that are likely to have inﬂuence on speech effectiveness, such
as gestures and voice pitch. However, in this contest, emotion is viewed
as critical, with entire books about how to plan one’s emotion [14]. We
saw that addressing the lack of quantitative methods to evaluate such
emotion as a contribution to domain knowledge.
The emotional factors are listed in Table 1. The modality of each
factor is indicated by V (voice), F (facial), or T (text). Some of the
factors to be studied were determined by a survey of literature. Our
later pre-survey in Sect. 7.4 conﬁrmed that experts view these factors
as signiﬁcant in speakers in the competition.
We also established non-emotional factors that would be critical
to assess speech effectiveness. For example, in the interviews, un-
prompted, three experts suggested that cross-cultural inﬂuences would
be important for the outcome of the contest, and that the effect of
culture on factors in the contest would be prominent. In Table 1, two
additional non-emotional factors for comparison, namely pauses and
vocabulary, were included that were estimated by the experts to have
signiﬁcant impact on effectiveness.
Table 1. Emotional and non-emotional factors and the p-values of factors.
Factor Modality Type(p-value) Type(p-value)
Average
Facial Arousal(0 .006∗) Valence(0.431)
Textual Arousal(0.215) Valence(0.088)
V ocal Arousal(0 .016∗) Valence(0 .017∗)
V olatility
Facial Arousal(0 .020∗) Valence(0 .006∗)
Textual Arousal(0.433) Valence(0.438)
V ocal Arousal(0.235) Valence(0.845)
Diversity Facial Across Emotion Type(0.120)
Final Facial Arousal(0 .002∗) Valence(0 .020∗)
Coherence All Arousal(0.124) Valence(0.051)
Ratio Facial
Happy(0.001∗) Sad(0.0736)
Fear(0.582) Angry(0.292)
Surprise(0.115) Disgust(0.306)
Neutral(0.488) -
Pauses V ocal Pauses(0.271) -
V ocabulary Textual V ocabulary(0.089) -
*: The factor has a signiﬁcant correlation with speech effectiveness.
3.2 Overall Goals
The preliminary interviews and literature review together led to the
overall goals to guide our research.
G1: To understand the relation between speech effectiveness
and various speech factors. The relative importance of different
speech factors and the role of factors on effectiveness in the contest are
critical for users.
G2: To understand the spatio-temporal distribution of factors
across multiple speeches.Referenced work showed that experts be-
lieved certain factors were more important at different moments of
speeches or that the time order of certain factors was important. The ge-
ographical distribution was also considered important by some domain
experts.
G3: To understand the effectiveness of individual speeches in
context. Speech experts in preliminary interviews expressed interest in
wanting to understand the patterns of an individual speech. Furthermore
how these factors in one speech relate to the factors and effectiveness
metrics of all speeches.
G4: To compare between speeches on various speech factors.
Observing similarity and differences of speeches can allow effective-
ness metrics to be connected with speaking styles.
G5: To understand speaking strategies among speech factors.
As revealed in our literature survey, there are different opinions about
how different factors are effectively used. These theories could be
evaluated.
3.3 Design Tasks
According to the overall goals above, we derived 10 design tasks in
Table 2, which are categorized as suggested by Kehrer and Hauser [15].
T1-2 focus on the visual data fusion, i.e., the way of presenting data to
support further exploration. T3-4 focus on the relation and comparison
between speeches, enabling users to understand the similarity and
difference. T5-6 focus on the navigation of speeches, which provide
users with interactions to explore in one speech or in a collection by
emotional cues. T7 relates to the analysis from overview to detail. T8
focuses on the factor of interest to be dynamically speciﬁed by users.
T9-10 mainly focus on the data abstraction and aggregation which
support users to ﬁnd out the hidden patterns or strategies in speeches
and estimate the speech effectiveness using algorithms.
4 D ATA AND ANALYSIS
In this section, as illustrated in the upper part of Fig. 2, we describe the
details of data collection (I), data pre-processing (II), factor calculation
(III) and the method of effectiveness analysis (IV) based on the results
of the domain-centered design procedure.
4.1 Data
There are three progressive steps for processing data into three levels:
original data, features and factors. Each speech consists of: 1) the
3
Table 2. Categorized Design Tasks and Corresponding Goals.
Category Design Task Overall Goals
Visual Data Fusion T1 To present temporal and geographical distributions of data. G1-G5
T2 To display multi-modal data aggregated as well as in time series. G1-G3
Relation & Comparison T3 To assist comparing speeches in one speech level and between different speech levels. G1, G2, G4, G5
T4 To present the relations of multiple speeches derived by algorithm. G4, G5
Navigation T5 To support browsing of speech videos guided by multi-modal emotional cues. G2, G3, G5
T6 To enable navigation of speech videos by emotional cues in video collections. G2, G4, G5
Overview + Detail T7 To support understanding data between speeches, of entire speeches, and within a speech. G1-G5
Interactive Feature Speciﬁcation T8 To allow selection of speciﬁed speeches and factors. G1-G5
Data Abstraction & Aggregation T9 To show the calculated correlation and distribution between effectiveness and factors. G1, G2, G4, G5
T10 To provide effectiveness estimation on speeches in terms of factors. G1, G3, G4, G5
original video; 2) the scripts; 3) metadata such as the start and ending
of the speech in the video; 4) information about the speech, including
contest region, year, level and rank; 5) feature data extracted from the
original video; 6) data of factors listed in Table 1.
4.1.1 Data Collection
The entire database includes 203 videos from the World Championship
of Public Speaking published online, including YouTube and WeChat
channels. We collected the videos and metadata manually. The contest
levels of the speech videos were recorded as a measurement of effec-
tiveness: area, division, district, semi-ﬁnal and ﬁnal. The amount of
videos for each level is approximately balanced, and we ensure that all
collected videos are of good quality. Detailed information about our
database is provided in Sect. 1 of the supplementary material.
4.1.2 Data Pre-processing
The part II of Fig. 2 illustrates the data pre-processing step of our
system. In order to acquire the previously mentioned factors, we
extracted image frames, voice and text from the original video. The
voice and text are aligned at the sentence level while the images remain
at the frame level.
Facial emotional data:We recognized discrete emotion types, va-
lence and arousal of the speaker from the frames of video. Faces in
frames and their positions are detected by face recognition [10]. The
faces are further clustered by DBSCAN [8] with the facial features ex-
tracted during detection to identify the faces of each speaker without the
interference from others’ faces in the video. AffectNet [22] is a widely
used database and baseline method for facial expression, valence and
arousal computing in the wild. We used AffectNet to extract the facial
emotion valence and arousal data. We extracted the facial emotion
types using an emotion classiﬁcation convolutional neural network by
Arriaga et al. [2].
Textual emotional data:We applied Azure Cognitive Speech to
Text Service1 to convert spoken audio to script text with timestamps
of each sentence and word. The method to extract the textual valence
and arousal data came from the work of Wang et al. [29], which uses a
regional CNN-LSTM model to analyze dimensional sentiment.
Vocal emotional data:With the timestamps of sentences, we split
the audio into sentence-level clips and applied an open-source toolbox
for multimodal emotion analysis developed by Buitelaar et al. [6] to
obtain the vocal valence and arousal data of the clips.
Non-emotional data: We considered two non-emotional factors.
The pauses between words and sentences as well as the words spoken
per minute were calculated with the timestamps. The vocabulary level
was measured with the Dale-Chall measure [30] calculated with an
open-source tool for assessing the readability level of a given text [27].
4.1.3 Factor Calculation
The raw data extracted from videos are time series of multi-modal
valence and arousal data. As it is not intuitive for users to explore the
data, we calculate some factors based on the raw data extracted in part
III of Fig. 2. The calculation methods are as follows. The time series
of multi-modal valence or arousal data is represented as D = {dmt }T
t=1,
where dmt indicates the t-th sample of time series data in the modality
1https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/
cognitive-services/speech-to-text/
of m. Similarly, the time series of multi-modal emotion type data is
represented as E = {emt }T
t=1. The average factor represents the average
value of a speciﬁc data modality over time:
average = ∑T
t=1 dmt
T (1)
V olatility represents the change of data over time. We ﬁrst normalize
the data, and compute volatility according to Equations (2)-(3).
Ddi f f = {dm
t −dm
t−1}T
t=2 (2)
volatility =
√
Ddi f f ·Ddi f f (3)
Diversity represents the variety and relative abundance of the emo-
tions [23]. We calculate it with Equation 4.
diversity =
e
∑
i=1
(ri ×lnri) (4)
Here e equals the total number of emotion types in E and ri equals
the proportion of E that contains the i-th emotion.
In [34], Zeng et al. explore the effect of emotion coherence across
facial, text and audio modalities. Similarly, we calculate the value of
arousal and valence coherence (deﬁned in Equation 5) where std and
mean indicate functions of calculating the standard deviation and the
mean value respectively.
The superscripts represent the modalities of data, where w, v and f
mean the textual, vocal and facial modalities.
coherence = 1
T
T
∑
t=1
std(dwt ,dvt ,d f
t )
mean(dwt ,dvt ,d f
t )
(5)
In interviews, experts estimated the last 20% of a speech to be more
important than other parts. So we calculated the ﬁnal valence and
arousal with Equation 6.
f inal = ∑T
t=0.8T dmt
T (6)
For calculating ﬁnal emotion, diversity and type ratio, we only select
facial data as input, since textual data and vocal data are much sparser
than facial data over time. For example, we could only extract an item
of textual or vocal data from a complete sentence, while we can extract
an item of facial data from each video frame. So for the same video,
the amount of textual/vocal data is much sparser. We found processed
textual/vocal results of these factors less convincing.
4.2 Factor Effectiveness Analysis
According to G1, we want to ﬁnd out the relation between speech
factors and effectiveness. Contest speech levels can be regarded as
ordinal variables, whose relative ordering is signiﬁcant. For example,
the grades of 1-5 may respectively represent 5 levels “area”, “division”,
“district”, “semi ﬁnal” and “world ﬁnal”. In the World Championship of
Public Speaking, only those who rank at the top of a level will advance
to a higher level. So we hypothesize that the higher the level, the
more effective the speech is. Given the factors of a certain speech, the
problem of predicting its level can be considered as an intermediate
4
© 2021 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2021.3114789
Fig. 2. An overview of our analytic system.
problem between regression and classiﬁcation [12]. We ﬁrst conducted
the test of parallel lines and found the p-value is smaller than 0.05,
proving that the level prediction problem is suitable to be solved by
multi-class ordinal regression. Then we split this prediction problem
into four sub-problems as shown in Fig. 2 IV . In each sub-problem, we
performed logistic regression on the odds ratio of each factor. Finally,
we obtained the p-value of each factor in Table 1, where we indicate
factors calculated as signiﬁcant relating to effectiveness. The result
of our factor effectiveness analysis shows that the average of facial
arousal, the average of vocal arousal and valence, the volatility of facial
arousal and valence, the ﬁnal facial arousal, and the ratio of facial happy
expressions all have a signiﬁcant correlation with speech effectiveness.
Taking experts’ advice into consideration, we selected typical factors
and embedded them into our system. According to the result of the
four sub-problems, we calculated the probability of the ﬁve levels as
the factors change value.
5 S YSTEM OVERVIEW
The design of the system was created in consideration of expert opinion,
user feedback, and insight from the factor effectiveness analysis. Fig. 2
illustrates the overview of our system architecture, which includes
two major parts: a data & analysis part and a visualization part. The
visualization part adopts multi-modal and multi-level data from the ﬁrst
part, providing an interactive analytic interface for insights.
Views. In the visualization part, as shown in Fig. 1, our system
consists of four views: (A) the view of factors, (B) the view of all
speeches, (C) the view of the selected speech and (D) the view of
the selected speech context. In view A, the table displays the factors
and p-values obtained from the factor calculation and effectiveness
analysis steps. It helps users to understand the relation between speech
effectiveness and various speech factors (G1), as well as the connection
of emotional data to other speech factors. Given the range of factors
of interest to the audience, a visualization system that provides an
overview of all factors would be ideal for understanding their relation
to effectiveness. The view B provides a panel to view all speeches
for comparison, navigation and exploration with ﬁve novel sub-views:
E-factor, E-similarity, E-spiral, E-script and E-type (G1, G2, G4, G5);
see Sect. 6 for details. We utilize the raw arousal and valence data
from pre-processing phase and factor values from factor calculation
phase to generate visualizations. These visualization techniques will
be introduced in Sect. 6 in more detail. The view C contains four sub-
views showing the data and visualizations of selected individual speech
(G3). It helps users analyze a selected speech in more detail. The
view D contains information about our database and detailed context
information of the speaker (G2, G3). The four views of our system
assist users to explore our database and ﬁnd what factors affect the
effectiveness of speech (G1, G5).
Sub-views. We mention that the view B and view C contain some
sub-views above. The sub-views in view B are set to assist users to
analyze overall trends, navigate and locate speeches of interest in our
database. E-factor and E-similarity show the distribution of all speeches
(G2). For E-spiral, E-script and E-type, we provide sub-views which
aggregate the visualizations of all speeches (G5). The sub-views in
view C are set to help users to observe the visualization of a selected
individual speech in more detail using visualization tools such as E-
spiral, E-script and E-type. We also visualize the original time series of
valence and arousal data in the timeline sub-view (G3).
Interaction. We chose to design interactive steps of the system with
Schneiderman’s information seeking mantra as a guideline: “overview
ﬁrst, zoom and ﬁlter, then details-on-demand.” [25] The views are
organized from left to right in terms of the level of abstraction of
the data. We provide some interactions to support the overview-to-
detail exploration process (G5). Upon selection of an effectiveness
factor, E-factor will show the distribution of the factor values with
all speeches. Users can also hover the mouse over the speeches to
see the individual speech data and click to change the view of the
selected speech. This interaction is supported by each of the sub-
views in the view of all speeches (B). These sub-views aggregate all
the visualizations of speeches and organize them by level. For deep
exploration, users can click the sub-views in view (C) to generate a
bigger visualization in a ﬂoating window. In E-similarity, upon clicking
the dot representing an individual speech, a radar-like chart will be
displayed in the right to show the predicted level of the critical factors
of the selected speech (G4).
6 V ISUALIZATION DESIGN
As with the system itself, our visualizations were designed in iterations
that began with interviews, and reﬁned with user feedback. In this
section we present the ﬁnal designs used in our system as well as
the reasoning behind our visualization methods. The relation of our
visualizations to our design tasks can be seen in Table 3.
We will introduce visualization techniques in two parts: visual-
izations generated from data of all speeches, including E-factor, E-
similarity and E-distribution; visualizations generated from individual
speech data, including E-spiral, E-script and E-type.
6.1 Visualizations Generated from All Speech Data
6.1.1 E-Factor
In our literature review of effectiveness in this inspirational speech
contest, we found many claims by experts that particular speech factors
have signiﬁcant relationships to speech performance. This visualization
aims to allow users to evaluate hypotheses of interest about speech
factors at the macroscopic level of all speeches.
Upon selection of a factor in (A) the user is presented with many
dots, with each dot positioned horizontally according to the cumulative
amount of the factor in a speech (T2). The speeches are sorted vertically
by the level of the speech.
As shown in Fig. 1(B1), the light blue rectangle for each level covers
the middle 50% distribution of the speeches and the dark blue line
indicates the median of each level (T3). A geographical analysis of
factors is provided in view (D). By clicking a country on the map, the
speakers belonging to the country will be highlighted, so users can
analyze the regional difference between countries (T1).
5
Table 3. Visualization Methods and Corresponding Tasks.
Module Description Task
E-factor To evaluate hypotheses of interest about speech factors using the cumulative data of all speeches. T1-T3, T6-T8
E-type To understand discrete emotional data contained in emotional types, as well as their distribution over time. T1, T3, T5, T7
E-script To understand the emotion in speech scripts. T1, T3, T6-T7
E-spiral To provide an intuitive way of understanding the emotional shifts within speeches. T1, T3, T6-T7
E-similarity To understand the similarity and the effectiveness estimation of speech factors in speeches. T3, T4, T7, T10
E-distribution To understand distribution of factor effectiveness among speech levels. T2, T3, T7-T9
Fig. 3. E-spiral: a novel spiral-type visualization of time-series emotion
data. A comparison is given: (a) Spiral without turning points. (b)
Spiral with turning points. Emotion shifts during speeches are intuitively
presented with an interaction showing the detailed data.
6.1.2 E-Similarity
According to the experts’ feedback, we found that they desired to com-
pare the similarity between speeches (T4). To allow this comparison we
chose the ﬁve most signiﬁcant factors as the speech’s feature vectors,
and used t-SNE [28] to reduce the dimensionality of feature vectors
to display all speeches on a two-dimensional map. The closer two
speeches are to each other, the more similar the two speeches are.
In order to better understand this relation, a radar chart displays the
ﬁve most signiﬁcant factors, and a given speech’s estimated level based
on the amount of each of the factors (T10). In Sect. 4.2, the result of
ordinal regression contains the probability of the contest levels at a
certain value of the factor. For a particular speech, we use the value
of a certain factor to predict its level and use the radial coordinate of
the radar chart to represent the predicted level. The larger the area of
the polygon in the radar chart, the higher the predicted effectiveness of
the speech is. As shown in Fig. 1 (B5), clicking a dot representing an
individual speech in the scatter plot brings up a radar chart. Dots are
color-encoded, allowing for rapid comparison of a speech’s estimated
level with its true value (T3).
6.1.3 E-Distribution
We designed E-distribution in order to show how the effect of each
factor changes the calculated probability of each level, which can
be interpreted as a metric of effectiveness (T10). In Sect. 4.2, we
obtained the probability of the ﬁve levels with respect to each factor.
The ﬁve lines in the graph represent the distribution of probability of
the ﬁve levels of the contest, with the same color encoding used as in
E-Similarity. We can observe E-Distribution in Fig. 1 (A). For example
for the factor arousal mean we can observe larger values to the right of
E-distribution result in higher probabilities of the darker line, or ﬁnal
level of the contest.
6.2 Visualizations Generated from Individual Speech Data
6.2.1 E-Spiral
In our preliminary interview experts had suggested that emotional
twists and turns may be important to consider in contest speeches.
Preliminary data analysis early in our collection of speeches conﬁrmed
this hypothesis, as we found that there was signiﬁcant statistical results
for shifts in arousal (p-value 0.020) and valence (p-value 0.006). We
sought to create a visualization that would present a compact view
of these emotional shifts so that speeches could be rapidly compared.
One option is spirals. According to a survey of timeline visualizations,
spirals have advantages for displaying certain kinds of information, and
their potential may not have been exhausted. Brehmer et al. found
that spirals are “appropriate for presenting many events within a single
dense display.” [5]. We therefore created a new form of spiral that shows
the emotional twists and turns in a visually dramatic way. Clockwise
and counterclockwise turns in the spiral indicate shifting negative and
positive emotions, with sharp angles of the visualization showing the
emotional turning points. Due to the compact structure, large scale
comparison is possible, supporting comparison and navigation between
speeches and within a speech (T7), as shown in Fig. 1(B2).
Based on the results extracted from the speech video, we identi-
ﬁed the speaker’s valence and arousal at regular intervals. Each circle
appears in chronological order, starting at the center of the spiral. Sig-
niﬁcant shifts in the valence of speeches are reﬂected in the change of
direction. As comparison of the emotional diversity of speeches was
stated to be a priority in our pre-survey of experts, we further indicated
the emotional type of the interval as the color of the circle. The circle
radius represents the arousal of emotions and transparency represents
the probability of the emotion being labeled correctly.
E-Spiral is generated in polar coordinates with θn = θn−1 + 2π∆r pi.
θn is the polar angle of the center of the n-th circle and ∆r = rn −rn−1
is the variation of the polar radius between the n-th circle and the
(n −1)-th circle, which is a constant value since the spiral expands at a
constant variation of radius.
The emotional turning points are generated based on the positive
and negative changes of accumulated emotions in intervals. Ei = Σan
is the accumulative emotion in an interval of 5 seconds, in which an is
one of the valence data in interval i. The spiral turns clockwise when
p = 1, while it turns counterclockwise when p = −1. The changing of
p decides the emotional turning points in spirals, which is calculated in
Equation 8. The initial value of p is deﬁned by the emotion in the ﬁrst
interval, shown in Equation 7.
p0 =
{ 1, E0 ⩾ 0,
−1, E0 < 0. (7)
pi⩾1 =
{−pi−1, Ei ∗Ei−1 < 0 and |Ei −Ei−1|> 10,
pi−1, otherwise. (8)
With the help of E-spiral, as shown in Fig. 3, we can clearly see the
changes of emotion during the speech via the turning spiral. Interaction
of rapidly skipping to the video frame of the selected speech by clicking
the circle on the spiral supports rapid browsing with emotional cues
(T5).
6.2.2 E-Script
How speech script content relates to key speech delivery information
is the subject of much literature on speech giving. E-script allows ﬁne
grained understanding of how multi-modal speech emotion (T5), word
speed, and pauses relate to the timing of each word of a speech (T1).
As experts advised that effective use of pauses and word speed was
important to the emotional delivery of script content, we sought to
indicate these factors in an intuitive way. We indicated the word speed
by the tracking between letters in a word and pauses as the spaces
between words.
In a novel approach, E-script aims to provide an audience with or-
dinary visualization literacy with an intuitive way of understanding
script emotional data by changing letter shape to encode quantitative
information (quantitative glyphs). E-script highlights emotionally in-
tense, high arousal moments. Sievers et al. [26] found that the shape
of lines can visually encode emotion and is closely related to arousal,
6
© 2021 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2021.3114789
Fig. 4. E-script: a novel visualization allowing key information about
the text expression and emotional trends to be compared across whole
speeches.
and can be seen as independent from valence. We supposed that this
visual mapping might be applied in visualizations with line shape. We
implemented this visual mapping of arousal directly in the speech script
by connecting the line based javascript font Leon Sans [16] with the
arousal information. The size of the text was also changed in order to
highlight emotionally intense moments in the speech. The method of
mapping of the color to the valence and arousal in the speech script can
be seen in the work [21].
No papers have been found in visual analytics that involve letter
shape adjustment in order to convey quantitative emotion. Brath et
al. [4] surveys existing text visualizations, noting only one case of
quantitative glyphs, used for indicating prosody. The use for intuitive
communication of emotion here can be seen as a novel expansion.
6.2.3 E-Type
As discussed in the interview section, an open question for speech
experts is the role of the categories of emotions in speeches, as well as
the temporal distribution of emotions (T1). E-type allows continuous
valence and arousal data to be compared to discrete emotional type data
across time in speeches. We supposed that a linear visualization might
be more intuitively understandable to non-expert audiences.
As shown in Fig. 5, we use a series of rectangles to show the cate-
gories of emotions and sample the emotional data of each speech evenly
200 times to get 200 rectangles. The color of rectangles represents the
category of emotion. The height and y-coordinates of the rectangle
represent the arousal value and valence value respectively. We use a
red line to connect the center points of the rectangles, which indicates
the change of valence. With E-Type, users can grasp the proportion of
each category of emotion more clearly. In contrast to E-spiral, E-type
offers a more ﬁne tuned view of continuous emotional data.
7 E VALUATION
Our evaluation focuses on two main goals as categorized by Lam et
al. [18]: user experience (UE), which we address with a usability test;
visual data analysis and reasoning (VDAR), which we address with a
user survey and a case study.
7.1 Study Design
The procedure of our evaluation is shown in Fig. 6. Before participants
experienced E-ffective, we introduced the project and related terms, as
well as pre-surveyed their opinions of speech factors (VDAR). Next,
they were introduced to the system, instructed to complete a series
of user tasks, then freely analyzed speeches by using the system. Fi-
nally, they ﬁnished a user experience interview (UE) and a post-survey
(VDAR).
User Tasks:The user tasks focused on instructing the participants
to better understand the main function of the visual analysis methods
and the whole system. We designed 10 user tasks aiming at both
visualization design (UT1-UT6) and system design (UT7-UT10). The
detailed tasks are listed in Sect. 4.2 of the supplementary material.
Participants were limited to using speciﬁed visualizations to complete
Fig. 5. E-type: A linear visualization of discrete emotional type together
with continuous emotional data.
Fig. 6. Our evaluation procedure.
UT1-UT6 while they were free to use any visual analysis methods to
complete UT7-UT10.
Free Analysis: 15 minutes of the evaluation was dedicated for
participants to analyze speeches by using the whole system in a self-
directed manner. During the analysis, participants were encouraged to
freely speak out their intent in using the system as well as their ﬁndings
on speech effectiveness. The purpose of the free analysis procedure
was to observe the creative ways users reasoned using the system and
record meaningful insights made by participants.
7.2 Participants
Our system is designed for both experts and novices. We recruited 16
participants for evaluation, including 8 experts in public speaking and
8 novices. All participants had competed in the World Championship
of Public Speaking, and all were active in the ﬁeld of public speaking.
None of the participants had expert level visualization literacy.
The experts participants (E1-E8) all had rich experience in public
speaking. Almost all of them (7 of 8) have participated in over ﬁve
speech contests and ﬁve of them have trained others for public speaking
as an occupation for more than ﬁve years. Half had STEM educational
backgrounds. Five of them had watched more than ﬁfty speech contests.
It is worth mentioning that one of the volunteers once won the second
place in the world ﬁnal of the contest, and another was a two-time
world semiﬁnal competitor.
Of the novice participants (N1-N8), seven of them had competed
in the contest at least twice. Half of them had STEM educational
backgrounds, the same ratio as experts. Most novices had watched
more than ten speeches, and they all desired to improve their speech
skills by learning from excellent speakers.
Detailed information about the participants is provided in Sect. 4.1
of the supplementary material.
7.3 Usability Testing
In our usability test, we wanted to evaluate how useful and easy to use
our system and visualization methods are.
Following the completion of both the user tasks and free analysis,
user experiences of participants were scored in 7-point likert scale
for usefulness and ease of use in a user experience questionnaire. As
shown in Fig. 7, the questionnaire evaluates both visualization design
and system design.
The description and results of the user experience questionnaire
are provided in Fig. 7. The mean and standard deviation of the result
Table 4. Statistical Data about the Results of the Questionnaire.
Question Visualization Design System Design
Mean Std Mean Std
Experts Usefulness 5.950 1.218 6.200 0.966
Ease of Use 6.075 1.047 6.200 0.822
Novices Usefulness 6.150 1.051 6.575 0.636
Ease of Use 5.900 1.033 6.050 0.876
7
Fig. 7. Result of the user experience questionnaire.
are shown in Table 4. From the results, we can conclude that the
mean scores are all higher than 5.9, showing that our system and
visualizations are useful and easy to use for experts and novices. The
standard deviations of the visualization design questions are higher
than the system design questions. Given the relatively low visualization
literacy of the participants, perhaps these novel visualizations may be
relatively complex, leading to different levels of understanding of them.
In Fig. 7, we can see that both experts and novices thought that E-
similarity is less useful and less easy to use than the other visualizations.
There was additional feedback from several participants that the ﬁve
signiﬁcant factors used in this visualization were not comprehensive
enough to understand a speech. Also, several participants had difﬁculty
conceptually understanding the t-SNE layout, leading to further difﬁ-
culty in understanding why two speeches appeared similar. Experts
preferred E-distribution, possibly because E-distribution can help them
intuitively ﬁnd out how effectiveness changes in regards to factors that
they are more familiar with. Novices preferred E-script, and several of
them said that they thought it was very useful to explore the emotion
shown inside the original speech script. Many found the pauses and
word speed information that was missing in other visualizations as
useful. For questions about system design, participants reported more
satisfaction with the guidance of emotional cues. They agreed that emo-
tion plays a key role in inspirational speeches. Novices reﬂected that
our system can help explore the effectiveness of speech factors. They
gave the system higher scores than the experts in terms of usefulness,
perhaps because experts have more experience about speech effective-
ness than novices, and thus they have their own opinions that may differ
from our system results. Novices scored the system lower in terms of
the ease of use than experts, perhaps because they lack experience in
public speaking and the terms associated with competition success. On
the whole, they needed more time to understand and grasp how to use
the system.
7.4 User Survey
Speech experts and novices were interviewed before using the system
to determine their views about the importance of factors in the con-
test. The participants were asked to give their opinions on whether
they thought a factor would signiﬁcantly impact performance between
contestants, and then to predict the typical role the factor had on perfor-
mance.
Afterwards, they were surveyed again to see whether their opinions
on the surveyed questions had changed. The participants generated
their hypothesis on the speech factors when they were pre-surveyed.
They further examined their hypothesis by using the system. In the post-
survey, we collected their results , which we later used to understand
Fig. 8. Result of the user survey. Comparing the opinions before and
after using the system. Darker blue values mean the opinion of a user
changed to be closer to the system suggestion, and brown means the
opposite.
their hypothesis generation and reasoning.
Surveyed factors and measurement.The factors included 1 factor
(average arousal) determined by our analysis in Sect. 4.2 to have sig-
niﬁcant inﬂuence, 2 factors (valence coherence, vocabulary level) to
have near signiﬁcant inﬂuence, as well as 2 factors (emotional diversity,
average valence) to have insigniﬁcant inﬂuence. The signiﬁcance is
measured in 1-7 from very insigniﬁcant to very signiﬁcant, and the
relationship is measured in -3-3 from very negative to very positive.
Results processing.We adapt our analysis results as ground truth
for judging the directions of opinion changes, so that the judgment
of whether the participants were inﬂuenced positively or negatively
can be concluded. The results of pre-survey ( Rpre) and post-survey
(Rpost) were further processed. For signiﬁcance results, the ﬁnal score
of each question is Fs = Rpost −Rpre if the suggested signiﬁcance in
our factor analysis is signiﬁcant and Fs = Rpre −Rpost if insigniﬁcant.
For relationship results, the ﬁnal score of each insigniﬁcant factor is
Fr = |Rpre|−|Rpost|to measure the change towards 0. The ﬁnal score
of each signiﬁcant factor is Fr = Rpost −Rpre if the relation is positive
and Fr = Rpre −Rpost if the relation is negative. The processed result
is shown in Fig. 8 as a heat map.
Survey prediction.The results of user survey prove that our system
inﬂuenced the participants’ opinions after using the system. In general,
we can see that our system had a positive impact on participants’ un-
derstanding of speech factors. Changes in the opinions of experts show
that they are slightly more affected than the novices. But we can also
ﬁnd that, more experts insisted on their own opinion on factors than
novices. In the respect to individual factors, there is a bigger change
in the opinion on the signiﬁcance of vocabulary for both experts and
novices. However, in terms of all factors, there is a difference between
the signiﬁcance and relationship in the changes of participants’ opin-
ions. The impact of the system on factor signiﬁcance seems to have
more negative results than that of factor relationship. The reason may
be that in the pre-survey participants expected the signiﬁcance too high,
but from the system they the factors less signiﬁcant than they thought.
So that in the post-survey they overcompensated and rated the factor as
under signiﬁcant. Overall, the results of user survey indicate that our
system enables users to update their opinions based on the ﬁndings by
exploring speech factor effectiveness.
7.5 Case Study
1) In our evaluation sessions we often found experts identifying effec-
tive and ineffective contest strategies (G5). Upon ﬁnding our system
had showed a trend among speakers at the lower levels having large
ratios of happy expressions, a past world second place winner of the
contest commented: “In my experience there are two kinds of speakers
at the lower levels: one shows a lot of happiness and jokes. Another
kind just tells a sad story. The emotion doesn’t change so much.” Later
this participant viewed the speeches sorted by emotional diversity with
E-factor and clicked on a speaker with very low emotional diversity.
The participant was surprised to ﬁnd it was the last world champion.
This countered her earlier pre-survey opinion that diversity is very
signiﬁcant and high diversity is better. She then carefully veriﬁed the
accuracy of the facial data using E-spiral by mousing over dots on the
visualization to reveal facial expressions. She then reasoned that online
speeches may not need as much emotional diversity, “this is an online
speech, it is a little bit different from a speech in a big meeting room.
When I was on the stage, I was facing a lot of people and they really
8
© 2021 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The ﬁnal version of this record is available at: 10.1109/TVCG.2021.3114789
couldn’t see my face, they had to look at the big screens.” This new
hypothesis revealed a limitation of our system: we had not separately
labeled and processed the results of online and ofﬂine speeches. In
other interviews additional tags were suggested regarding yearly trends,
gender, and other factors.
Exploring the context of different speaking strategies was often focus
of experts during the evaluations.
One expert with contest experience in both China and at the world
semiﬁnal level in the United States explored the geographical differ-
ences among competitors (G2). He found the vocabulary of contestants
in China to be lower and after exploration of the difference in China
and the USA, he sorted contestants by vocabulary with E-factor to ﬁnd
a world ﬁnalist contestant. He then used E-script to ﬁnd the many difﬁ-
cult words used by the competitor: “If he is competing in China, he is
going to lose the competition. Native speakers tend to have high levels
of English vocabulary, but when they are addressing to different groups
of audiences they probably should use a lower level of vocabulary.”
This new hypothesis countered his pre-survey prediction that winning
speeches were more likely to have higher vocabularies.
Expert opinion about the use of vocabulary differed strongly in our
interviews, as well as among existing literature. A previous world
champion supported his view that the best speeches have simpler vo-
cabularies with the claim “winning (world champion) speeches over
the preceding 17 years ranged at grade levels between 3.5 and 7.7” [7]
What this claim does not show is that in our survey, speeches at the
highest level of the contest have larger vocabularies on average than
any other level.
2) Several users and experts found additional applications for E-
script to understand critical factors of speech delivery. One novice and
former district contestant found E-script was intuitive to understand:
“(E-script is) useful for me because if I can see where I need to slow
down my pace. And I can also see where the color matches the emotion
and if it ﬁts.” The application of E-script by other users to evaluate
emotional coherence across modalities as well as paces and pauses was
observed in our evaluation.
Furthermore, an expert who works full time in training for public
speaking gave E-script full marks for usability and easiness, and pro-
vided suggestions for development: ”I love it, I can see how people
can use pauses to make their speech more powerful. In the future there
could be a function where people could view and collaborate directly
on the use of pauses in the script.”
8 D ISCUSSION
In this section, the limitations and future directions of our system are
elaborated on.
8.1 Data and Processing
While collecting speech videos of over 200 inspirational videos from
open access channels, we tried to keep a balance of quality and quantity.
The size of the database is still insufﬁcient for conclusive evidence
about the factors we studied. Therefore, we plan to enlarge the size
of the database while further applying the system to other practical
domain applications.
8.2 Factors and Analysis
In this paper we focused on the major factors taken from our literature
review and interviews of domain experts. However, determining what
factors affect the performances of speeches still remains a complicated
problem. It is hard to include all the factors that matter and reduction is
necessary for better quantitative analysis methods.
In order to better ﬁnd out the factors affecting the effectiveness of
the speech, we extracted some factors from the valence and arousal
data, instead of directly analyzing the valence and arousal data. While
this allows users to more intuitively explore what factors affect the
effectiveness of the speech, on the other hand it may be oversimpliﬁed.
Current effectiveness analysis on factors is limited to the univariate lin-
ear regression analysis, and the system does not consider the interaction
between variables and other complex relations.
8.3 Limitations in Evaluation
In our evaluation we aimed to assess user experience and visual data
analysis and reasoning. There are limitations to the results we obtained,
especially in the case of the user survey. While we compare results
before and after use of E-ffective to the estimated results of our model,
these results cannot be construed to suggest learning. Problems in the
study design may inﬂuence the results, including the small sample size.
Additionally, factors such as the reputation of the developers of the
system or the evaluation organizer may inﬂuence the credibility of our
prediction outcomes. The difference of the reliability of our models on
one type of data may also inﬂuence the perceived reliability of other
types of data. The varying accuracy of the various models we use in
our system are likely to skew the results of our post-survey.
8.4 Limitations in Domain
The effectiveness of a speech is a very subjective issue, and there is
no clear and quantiﬁable evaluation standard. Different people may
have very different opinions of the same speech, which depends on
the preferences of the audience, cultural differences, and many other
factors. We try our best to analyze the patterns of speeches in an
objective, data-driven way. In addition, emotion does not play a key
role in all types of speeches. Many public speaking experts consider
emotion to play a special importance in inspirational speeches. The
results of our current visual analysis are not applicable to all situations.
8.5 Generalization
The E-ffective system proposed in this paper focuses on exploring
the effectiveness of factors in inspirational speeches. Through the
evaluation part of our work, it is proved to be useful, easy-to-use, and
ﬁts the domain requirements. Moreover, insights were made by users
that had different levels of experience in the domain. However, the
potential of our system is not restricted to the domain of inspirational
speeches. We can see the possibilities of extending the system to
analyze the effectiveness of factors in other kinds of speeches.
9 C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose E-ffective, a visual analytic system built for
speech experts and novices to evaluate the effectiveness of speaking
strategies. Our system primarily addresses factors involving emotional
expression in an inspirational speech contest. Our evaluation studies
conﬁrmed the utility by a usability testing study, and the ability of
participants to analyze and reason using the system was demonstrated
in the case study and two surveys. In order to support the needs of
our users we found many potential factors inﬂuencing effectiveness
in the competition. From algorithms and visualization methods we
found what factors were tied to effectiveness. The importance and
utility of these factors were later veriﬁed in our evaluation. Two novel
forms of visualization, namely E-spiral and E-script were developed to
further assist users to understand critical factors and their application
in speeches.
In future work, we have already begun to expand our database of
inspirational contest speeches as well as expand our methods to create
other kinds of speech effectiveness databases. We also plan to improve
our analysis methods by means of considering the interrelation of
factors and further expansion of the considered factors. Finally, we see
the potential for additional visualization methods to be developed to
more intuitively display factors critical for the effectiveness of speeches.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Beijing Natural Science Founda-
tion (4212029), the Natural Science Foundation of China (61872346,
61725204), Alibaba Group through the Alibaba Innovative Research
Program and the 2019 Newton Prize China Award (NP2PB/100047).
REFERENCES
[1] W. Aristotle. Rhys roberts. rhetoric, 2009.
[2] O. Arriaga, M. Valdenegro-Toro, and P. Pl¨oger. Real-time convolutional
neural networks for emotion and gender classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.07557, 2017.
9
[3] L. L. Barker, R. J. Kibler, and R. W. Geter. Two investigations of the
relationship among selected ratings of speech effectiveness and compre-
hension. Communications Monographs, 35(3):400–406, 1968.
[4] R. Brath and E. Banissi. Using typography to expand the design space
of data visualization. She Ji: The Journal of Design, Economics, and
Innovation, 2(1):59–87, 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.sheji.2016.05.003
[5] M. Brehmer, B. Lee, B. Bach, N. H. Riche, and T. Munzner. Timelines
revisited: A design space and considerations for expressive storytelling.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization & Computer Graphics , PP(9):1–1,
2017.
[6] P. Buitelaar, I. D. Wood, S. Negi, M. Arcan, J. P. McCrae, A. Abele,
C. Robin, V . Andryushechkin, H. Ziad, H. Sagha, M. Schmitt, B. W.
Schuller, J. F. S ´anchez-Rada, C. A. Iglesias, C. Navarro, A. Giefer,
N. Heise, V . Masucci, F. A. Danza, C. Caterino, P. Smr ˇz, M. Hradi ˇs,
F. Povoln´y, M. Klimeˇs, P. Matˇejka, and G. Tummarello. Mixedemotions:
An open-source toolbox for multimodal emotion analysis. IEEE Transac-
tions on Multimedia, 20(9):2454–2465, 2018. doi: 10.1109/TMM.2018.
2798287
[7] J. Donovan and R. Avery. Speaker, Leader, Champion: Succeed at
Work Through the Power of Public Speaking, featuring the prize-winning
speeches of Toastmasters World Champions. McGraw Hill Professional,
2014.
[8] M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, and X. Xu. A density-based algorithm
for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise. In Proceed-
ings of the Second International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, KDD’96, p. 226–231. AAAI Press, 1996.
[9] M. Fuyuno, Y . Yamashita, T. Saitoh, and Y . Nakajima. Semantic structure,
speech units and facial movements: Multimodal corpus analysis of english
public speaking. 2017.
[10] A. Geitgey. face recognition. https://github.com/ageitgey/face_
recognition, 2018.
[11] D. F. Gundersen and R. Hopper. Relationships between speech delivery
and speech effectiveness. Communications Monographs, 43(2):158–165,
1976.
[12] P. A. Guti ´errez, M. Perez-Ortiz, J. Sanchez-Monedero, F. Fernandez-
Navarro, and C. Hervas-Martinez. Ordinal regression methods: survey
and experimental study. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering, 28(1):127–146, 2015.
[13] F. S. Haiman. An experimental study of the effects of ethos in public
speaking. Communications Monographs, 16(2):190–202, 1949.
[14] V . G. Jhingran.Emote: using emotions to make your message memorable.
Red Wheel/Weiser, 2014.
[15] J. Kehrer and H. Hauser. Visualization and visual analysis of multifaceted
scientiﬁc data: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Com-
puter Graphics, 19(3):495–513, 2013. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2012.110
[16] J. Kim. Leon sans. https://github.com/cmiscm/leonsans, 2019.
[17] D. Kravvaris and K. L. Kermanidis. Speakers’ language characteristics
analysis of online educational videos. In IFIP International Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Applications and Innovations, pp. 60–69. Springer,
2014.
[18] H. Lam, E. Bertini, P. Isenberg, C. Plaisant, and S. Carpendale. Empirical
studies in information visualization: Seven scenarios. IEEE transactions
on visualization and computer graphics, 18(9):1520–1536, 2011.
[19] D. Lapakko. Communication is 93% nonverbal: An urban legend prolif-
erates. Communication and Theater Association of Minnesota Journal,
34(1):2, 2007.
[20] P. E. Lull. The effectiveness of humor in persuasive speech. Communica-
tions Monographs, 7(1):26–40, 1940.
[21] C. X. Ma, J. C. Song, Q. Zhu, K. Maher, Z. Y . Huang, and H. A. Wang.
Emotionmap: Visual analysis of video emotional content on a map. Jour-
nal of Computer Science and Technology, 35(3):576–591, 2020.
[22] A. Mollahosseini, B. Hasani, and M. H. Mahoor. Affectnet: A database
for facial expression, valence, and arousal computing in the wild. IEEE
Trans. Affect. Comput., 10(1):18–31, Jan. 2019. doi: 10.1109/TAFFC.
2017.2740923
[23] J. Quoidbach, J. Gruber, M. Mikolajczak, A. Kogan, I. Kotsou, and M. I.
Norton. Emodiversity and the emotional ecosystem. Journal of experi-
mental psychology: General, 143(6):2057, 2014.
[24] V . Ramanarayanan, C. W. Leong, L. Chen, G. Feng, and D. Suendermann-
Oeft. Evaluating speech, face, emotion and body movement time-series
features for automated multimodal presentation scoring. In Proceedings
of the 2015 ACM on International Conference on Multimodal Interaction,
pp. 23–30, 2015.
[25] B. Shneiderman. The eyes have it: A task by data type taxonomy for
information visualizations. In The craft of information visualization, pp.
364–371. Elsevier, 2003.
[26] B. Sievers, C. Lee, W. Haslett, and T. Wheatley. A multi-sensory
code for emotional arousal. Proceedings of the Royal Society B ,
286(1906):20190513, 2019.
[27] A. van Cranenburgh. readability. https://github.com/andreasvc/
readability/, 2019.
[28] L. Van der Maaten and G. Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of
machine learning research, 9(11), 2008.
[29] J. Wang, L.-C. Yu, K. R. Lai, and X. Zhang. Dimensional sentiment
analysis using a regional CNN-LSTM model. In Proceedings of the 54th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
2: Short Papers), pp. 225–230. Association for Computational Linguistics,
Berlin, Germany, Aug. 2016. doi: 10.18653/v1/P16-2037
[30] Wikipedia contributors. Dale–chall readability formula — Wikipedia,
the free encyclopedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.
php?title=Dale%E2%80%93Chall_readability_formula&oldid=
1026007428, 2021. [Online; accessed 29-June-2021].
[31] A. Wu and H. Qu. Multimodal analysis of video collections: Visual
exploration of presentation techniques in ted talks. IEEE transactions on
visualization and computer graphics, 26(7):2429–2442, 2018.
[32] P. Yaffe. The 7% rule: fact, ﬁction, or misunderstanding. Ubiquity,
2011(October):1–5, 2011.
[33] H. Zeng, X. Shu, Y . Wang, Y . Wang, L. Zhang, T.-C. Pong, and H. Qu.
Emotioncues: Emotion-oriented visual summarization of classroom videos.
IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics, 2020.
[34] H. Zeng, X. Wang, A. Wu, Y . Wang, Q. Li, A. Endert, and H. Qu. Emoco:
Visual analysis of emotion coherence in presentation videos. IEEE trans-
actions on visualization and computer graphics, 26(1):927–937, 2019.
10