© 2023 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/
SpeechMirror: A Multimodal Visual Analytics System for
Personalized Reflection of Online Public Speaking Effectiveness
Zeyuan Huang , Qiang He , Kevin Maher , Xiaoming Deng , Member, IEEE, Yu-Kun Lai , Member, IEEE,
Cuixia Ma , Sheng-feng Qin , Y ong-Jin Liu , Senior Member, IEEE, and Hongan Wang , Member, IEEE
Abstract— As communications are increasingly taking place virtually, the ability to present well online is becoming an indispensable skill.
Online speakers are facing unique challenges in engaging with remote audiences. However, there has been a lack of evidence-based
analytical systems for people to comprehensively evaluate online speeches and further discover possibilities for improvement. This
paper introduces SpeechMirror, a visual analytics system facilitating reflection on a speech based on insights from a collection of online
speeches. The system estimates the impact of different speech techniques on effectiveness and applies them to a speech to give
users awareness of the performance of speech techniques. A similarity recommendation approach based on speech factors or script
content supports guided exploration to expand knowledge of presentation evidence and accelerate the discovery of speech delivery
possibilities. SpeechMirror provides intuitive visualizations and interactions for users to understand speech factors. Among them,
SpeechTwin, a novel multimodal visual summary of speech, supports rapid understanding of critical speech factors and comparison of
different speech samples, and SpeechPlayer augments the speech video by integrating visualization of the speaker’s body language
with interaction, for focused analysis. The system utilizes visualizations suited to the distinct nature of different speech factors for user
comprehension. The proposed system and visualization techniques were evaluated with domain experts and amateurs, demonstrating
usability for users with low visualization literacy and its efficacy in assisting users to develop insights for potential improvement.
Index Terms—Visual Analytics, Multimodal Analysis, Public Speaking, Online Presentation
1 I NTRODUCTION
In recent years there is a rapidly growing trend of virtual communica-
tion. For speakers, the transition from offline to online opens up new
ways to express ideas. However, it also poses challenges for speakers
to engage audiences at a distance.
Guidance for better virtual presentations has been provided for gen-
eral tips [48], workplace meetings [43], and various virtual scenarios
in remote education [21]. However, these tips only give theoretical
advice that can be difficult to be used to evaluate or guide practical
presentation delivery. For speaking there are inconsistencies between
different theories about speech techniques [33,65]. It is time consuming
and experience demanding for speakers to understand how their speech
performs and even harder to find references for potential improvement.
Existing literature has reported research on the analysis of speech
presentation techniques. Some studies have analyzed the relationship
between individual [28, 56, 57, 59, 71] or multiple [16, 32, 38, 45, 51, 64]
speech factors and the effectiveness of the speech. However, while
these methods typically analyze effectiveness of speech factors in the
form of scores, it is challenging for users to grasp the underlying rea-
sons for the score and consequently identify areas for improvement.
• Z.Y. Huang, Q. He, X.M. Deng, C.X. Ma, and H.A. Wang are with the Beijing
Key Laboratory of Human-Computer Interaction, Institute of Software,
Chinese Academy of Sciences and also with the School of Computer Science
and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. E-mail:
{zeyuan2020, heqiang2022, xiaoming, cuixia, hongan}@iscas.ac.cn.
• Kevin Maher is with Diatom Design Limited Liability Company. E-mail:
kevintmaher@gmail.com.
• Y.-K. Lai is with the School of Computer Science and Informatics, Cardiff
University. E-mail: LaiY4@cardiff.ac.uk.
• S. Qing is with the School of Design, Northumbria University. E-mail:
sheng-feng.qin@northumbria.ac.uk.
• Y.-J. Liu is with the Department of Computer Science and Technology,
MOE-Key Laboratory of Pervasive Computing, Tsinghua University.
E-mail: liuyongjin@tsinghua.edu.cn.
• C.X. Ma, Y.-J. Liu, H.A. Wang are corresponding authors.
Manuscript received xx xxx. 201x; accepted xx xxx. 201x. Date of Publication
xx xxx. 201x; date of current version xx xxx. 201x. For information on
obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to: reprints@ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx
Visual analytics systems have been proposed to facilitate an interactive
exploration of presentation techniques. Existing visual analytics meth-
ods can be classified into two dimensions: single factor versus multiple
factors, and individual speech versus a collection of speeches. However,
these works are unable to directly assess the effectiveness of speech
factors, nor do they provide a comprehensive list of speech factors for
analysis. Although existing works mainly rely on video inputs, none
of them are specifically designed for online public speaking scenarios.
Connecting with remote audiences through a camera requires some
particular presentation techniques that deserve further exploration.
In this work, we propose SpeechMirror, a visual analytics system
that allows experts and amateurs in public speaking to gain insights into
a speech driven by a large-scale analysis of online speeches. Speech-
Mirror can help understand areas for improvement and recommend
examples of speeches as references for practicing improvement.
The system allows enhanced ability to understand the estimated
effectiveness of different techniques in a speech. While various ideas
exist for measuring speech effectiveness [33], we utilize a collection
of videos ranked in a speech contest as our quantifiable metric. To
understand the underlying techniques that influence the effectiveness
of online speeches, we establish various multimodal speech factors
from domain interviews and existing literature. We especially consider
techniques that are different in online speeches including the use of
stage, eye contact, and body gestures. Based on our collection of
speeches, we determine the relationship between various techniques and
effectiveness. With these identified relationships, they can be applied
to detect the areas for improvements (via diagnostics) and recommend
some techniques via examples to improve the speech effectiveness (via
prediction). Thus, users can gain awareness of the estimated impact of
various factors on a speech as a whole or in individual sentences.
SpeechMirror offers a personalized recommendation approach to
explore various possibilities for speech delivery. The recommendation
is based on a selected part of speech and produces results at different
granularity levels (in entire speech or individual sentence) and different
modes (by factors or script contents). The recommendation allows
reflection on a speech compared with other speeches in the collection,
which expands user knowledge of possible expressions.
Challenges to the scope of the interface of our system include the
complexity brought in by a number of multimodal factors, a large
amount of changes of the factors over time, as well as supporting
1
arXiv:2309.05091v1  [cs.HC]  10 Sep 2023
Fig. 1: Our visual analytics system supports the evaluation and understanding of presentation techniques as well as discovering expression
possibilities. The Factor Panel (A) delivers feedback on the effectiveness of speech factors and assists in comprehending the trends of speech factor
effectiveness. The Speaker Panel (B) provides an augmented video integrating visualizations of presentation techniques. The Time Slice Panel (C)
enables users to understand the effectiveness and factor data with script over time. The Mirror Panel (D) recommends similar or different speeches
and facilitates intuitive comparison between speeches with visual summary.
comparison and contrast of different speech samples. Given the low
visualization literacy of our target users, we provide intuitive visual-
izations for better understanding. Specifically, we design SpeechTwin,
a novel visual speech summary, to facilitate rapid comprehension of
speech factors and comparison between speeches. In order to allow
an enhanced understanding of body language in the original context,
SpeechPlayer directly visualizes presentation techniques in the video
feed. Also significant is a series of different glyphs developed to support
an intuitive understanding of speech features.
The major contributions of our work include: (1) a visual analytics
system to assist in analyzing the effectiveness of an individual online
speech within a collection of speeches; (2) novel visualization designs
integrating multimodal features and factors to support the understand-
ing of the use of presentation techniques; (3) usability of our system
demonstrated and analytical insights gained in an evaluation study.
2 R ELATED WORK
2.1 Automated Analysis of Public Speaking
With the assistance of computers, presentations are digitalized and
analyzed in a quantitative way. The research can be classified into two
major directions in this discussion.
Computation-centered approaches focus on building computa-
tional models to evaluate the effectiveness and significance of different
presentation techniques. Some research works focused on analyzing
presentation techniques in single modality, such as upper body ges-
ture [71], language characteristics [28], body movements [56], prosodic
voice characteristics [59], narrative trajectories [57], etc. Additional
efforts have been made to take advantage of multimodal information for
analysis. To estimate the presentation performance level, Echeverría et
al. [16] used eye contact from video, body posture, and body language
from a Kinect, and Luzardo et al. [32] used slides and audio. Wörtwein
et al. [64] assessed public speaking performance with audiovisual fea-
tures. Nojavanasghari et al. [38] studied persuasiveness prediction by
a deep multimodal fusion method with visual, acoustic, and text de-
scriptors. Ramanarayanan et al. [45] scored presentations with speech,
face, emotion and body movement. Sharma et al. [51] predicted video
popularity of TED (technology, entertainment and design) talks from
facial and physical appearance, facial expressions, and pose variations.
These efforts evaluate speech performance based on indicators of ef-
fectiveness such as video popularity and audience ratings. In our work,
we adopted a speech contest scenario, with the contest placement serv-
ing as a measure of speech effectiveness. With a computation-based
approach, it is easy for speakers to obtain performance assessment, but
hard to further investigate why and how to do better. In our system,
we provide insights on speech factor effectiveness and further support
exploration for areas of improvement.
Visualization-centered approaches present the data of presentation
techniques through visualizations and further support users in gaining
insights through exploration. Existing literature focuses on different
purposes of speech analysis: identifying narration strategies [66], un-
derstanding emotion [69], training vocal skills [62], analyzing debate
transcripts [53], exploring presentation techniques [65], decomposing
humor [61], assisting the exploration of gestures [68], and analyzing
the effectiveness of different speech factors [33]. While prior works
have provided approaches to understand the contributions of speech
factors or recommend evidence for public speaking training, our work
aims at evaluating a single speech, assisting users to analyze the speech
in the context of a speech collection.
Current research mainly focuses on offline presentations or taking a
video as input. Distinct from in-person presentations, there are unique
techniques that can make online presentations more effective. To the
best of our knowledge, there is still a lack of qualitative research in the
online public speaking scenario.
2.2 Online Public Speaking
The importance of online public speaking has increased in recent years.
The consulting firm Gartner predicts that by 2024 only 25% of business
meetings are offline [47]. In the testing phase of a system including
both online and offline speeches, an experienced public speaking expert
2
© 2023 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/
reasoned that there were significant differences in the emotional expres-
sion of online and offline contests [33]. Teodorescu et al. [58] found
possible differences in NLP (Natural Language Processing) of titles in
an online and offline contest, focused on microcontroller applications.
There are other important differences of online and offline speeches
that could be uniquely investigated by analytical systems. Since the
fixed reference frame of the camera and fixed position of the micro-
phone are perceived the same to all members of the audience, the
effects of eye contact, stage movement, and voice volume can be better
measured. Ochoa et al. created an automated system measuring speech
delivery to a remote audience [39].
2.3 Human Physical Behavior Data Visualization
Our work focuses on body language, including facial expression, eye
gaze, gestures, and positional movement.
Gesture and positional information is important to understand in
speeches. In sports, Stein et al. [54] integrated movement data including
possible player movement directly with the original video, “enabling
analysts to draw on the advantages of both”. Mova [1] used small
multiples of extracted body keypoints that were annotated with color
to indicate features of movement. A design prototype we considered
included these enhanced keypoints. In public speaking, GestureLens
[68] provided interactions to support the understanding of gestures in
relation to content and time. In contrast to their work, we focus on how
to show gestures not only between different words in a sentence, but
also creating representative skeletons for custom time ranges.
There are many strategies to visualize eye gaze. Much research fo-
cused on how to visualize where gaze is directed, such as fixation points
and saccades [13], and heatmaps [40]. Our work instead focuses on
the direction that a speaker is looking at, which can more clearly show
eye contact or gaze directions that fit with speech content. Similarly,
Higuch et al. developed visualizations to show the eye gaze direction
of autistic children [23].
The complexity of facial expression has led to a variety of visualiza-
tion strategies to present them. E-ffective used a spiral visualization to
show emotional shifts in speakers as well as a text-based visualization to
display emotion in the context of a speech script [33]. In EmotionCues,
Zeng et al. created an Emotion Band, a visualization that allows users
to track emotion changes of multiple users in a flow-based design [67].
For our work we were interested in presenting the relative differences
for a range of emotional factors, and developed visualizations for a
range of these factors.
3 D ESIGN OF SPEECH MIRROR
In this section, we will introduce the domain-centered design ofSpeech-
Mirror. The design process mainly contains two stages: literature
reviews and domain interviews with public speaking experts and ama-
teurs. With the insights gained, we derived the design considerations
and the scope of presentation techniques in our system.
3.1 Design Process
The main goal of our work is to assist public speaking experts and
amateurs in understanding a speech by means of guided insights from a
collection of speeches. We first reviewed the existing literature to build
a list of speech factors that are potentially related to the effectiveness
of public speaking. We also developed an understanding of the distinct
characteristics of online speech presentations.
To better understand the demands amateurs and experts valued as
important, we conducted 30-minute semi-structured interviews with 6
volunteer participants, including 4 experts (DE1 - DE4) and 2 amateurs
(DA1 - DA2). Both the amateurs and the experts had participated in
the World Championship of Public Speaking (WCPS) contest at least
once. The experts all had experience coaching public speaking as an
occupation. The amateurs have experience in online public speaking
contests between 2-5 times and have watched no more than 50 speeches.
The goal of the interviews is to understand their opinions on effec-
tive online presentation techniques, current practice and challenges
in developing public speaking skills, as well as their needs for a new
speech video analysis tool. Detailed information on the interviews is
provided in Sect. 1 of the supplemental material.
3.2 Design Considerations
We derived the design considerations forSpeechMirror from existing
literature and our domain interviews.
DC1: Provide an integrated way of understanding the effective-
ness of speech factors in a speech within a speech collection. It is
important to reveal the effectiveness of speeches. In our interviews,
DE4 mentioned the requirement of having a benchmark to measure
speech performance. Focusing on providing exploration of factors
within a speech collection, E-ffective showed both the importance and
difficulty in understanding the effectiveness of speech factors through
the feedback ratings. To migrate the challenges, we sought to provide
users’ insights on their speeches in SpeechMirror, so that users can
understand the speech performance. In the interviews, DE3, a full-time
public speaking trainer, thought there are many factors in speeches that
trainers need to keep in mind for feedback. He remarked, “ a trainer
might ignore or forget the top 8 (factors), but a system might be able
to tell the top 9. ” Thus we sought out a more comprehensive set of
effectiveness factors for consideration, as well as a more integrated way
for understanding the factors.
DC2: Provide a convenient approach for obtaining speeches
for reference. A promising study [62] demonstrated the potential
for improvement of speeches by discovery of high quality examples.
They claimed the future improvement of showing negative samples as
warnings to avoid. The importance of references was also brought to
our attention during our interview sessions. In our interviews with less
experienced amateurs, they voiced needs to discover different ways of
expression. When discussing the use of body language, DA2 stated “a
problem is that I only compare to what I know. With the same (speech)
content, I wonder how others express it. ” DA1 similarly expressed
uncertainty about the use of eye contact and gestures. More generally,
DE2 claimed priority should be placed in video referencing, “study the
people who do better than you are.” Our system aims to offer speech
samples with similar or different speech delivery or content to facilitate
exploration. These samples exhibit varying levels of effectiveness to
allow the comprehension of possible expressions.
DC3: Reveal the temporal distribution of the effectiveness of
speech factors. The order of techniques in speeches matters, and
many sources have theories about advantages of using techniques at
different times. The WCPS 2012 champion advised stage movement
where the speaker should “end your speech in the same location where
you began” [15]. A university textbook on public speaking claims
the order of gestures as they appear in relation to the main idea in the
speech can be important [34]. Our interviews also revealed opportunity
for speakers to learn from time order. DE3 claimed speakers might
not only be unclear about what they should do in their speech, but
also “not be clear what they did in their speech. Did they smile at the
beginning?” SpeechMirror supports the needs of understanding the use
of presentation techniques over time in an intuitive way.
DC4: Demonstrate speech factors in relation to the multimodal
context within a speech. Our interviews revealed the necessity of
viewing speech factors, such as the factor raw data and factor ef-
fectiveness, in reference to the broader context of the speech. In
our interview DE4 stated that “ content is the most important, espe-
cially cultural background”, pointing out the significance of verbal
context. Displaying how non-verbal techniques relate to the verbal con-
text is commonly used in visual analytic systems for speech analysis,
e.g. [33,61,65,68,69]. The video context was also claimed to be impor-
tant in our interviews. DE3, DE2, DA1 stated that for online speeches,
understanding how to move in the limited space was crucial. Other
interviewees brought up factors such as eye contact, stage movement,
and using gestures within the limited space, all of which are difficult
to understand without reference to the original video. Thus, we intend
to provide the original video context and verbal context to enhance
understanding of factors inside a speech.
DC5: Summarize the most relevant techniques used. We evaluate
23 different techniques in speeches. Given the large amount of informa-
3
Table 1: Presentation techniques, multimodal features and corresponding
factors considered in SpeechMirror. The significance of factors with *
indicates a significant correlation with speech effectiveness (p < 0.05).
Presentation Technique Feature Factor Significance
Facial Expression
Type Diversity p=0.002∗
Valence V olatility p=0.571
Average p=0.005∗
Arousal V olatility p=0.761
Average p=0.000∗
Eye Contact Gaze Direction V olatility p=0.002∗
Dispersion p=0.067
Watching Camera Ratio p=0.265
Use of Stage
Distance from CameraV olatility p=0.908
Dispersion p=0.185
Position in Frame V olatility p=0.026∗
Dispersion p=0.141
Body Gesture Gesture Energy V olatility p=0.860
Average p=0.426
Gesture Diversity Diversity p=0.266
V oice
V olume V olatility p=0.000∗
Average p=0.413
Pitch V olatility p=0.438
Average p=0.988
Pace
Speaking Rate V olatility p=0.617
Average p=0.198
Pauses V olatility p=0.157
Average p=0.533
Content Script - -
tion at hand, visualization methods that provide relevant summaries of
the techniques are crucial. The data of the techniques are time series, so
it is hard for users to grab key information within the data. Data aggre-
gation and abstraction are thus necessary. Relevancy for the summaries
both depends on the significance of the factor and the different use of
the technique in terms of speeches in the collection. Less significant
information is deemphasized or hidden from view. The summaries aim
to enhance browsing of speeches, provide key information about the
user’s speech, and assist comparison of different speeches.
3.3 Scope of Presentation Techniques
There are many techniques that go into successful public speaking.
Schneider et al. [50] provide an extensive list collected from public
speaking experts about non-verbal communication practices.
For online speaking there are additional techniques to consider, due
to the limited camera view, single viewing angle of the audience, etc.
Several techniques critical to effective online speaking have yet to be
intentionally visualized for further analysis. Through existing literature
and domain interviews, we attempt to build a more comprehensive list
of techniques ( DC1). We balanced the technical feasibility and the
domain significance in our list.
Eye contact is a technique we found important enough to focus
on. DE2 claimed that in online contests “ connection to the audience
with a camera is critical. The key is to be a natural speaker in front
of the camera.” DE1 and DA1 also found its importance, with DA1
claiming they “ don’t know where to look at. ”. Literature on online
public speaking also emphasized the importance of eye contact. In
the book Presenting Virtually [48], Patti Sanchez claimed “eye contact
is essential to make your message feel direct and personal”, however,
“looking directly into the camera can be a challenge for presenters who
are accustomed to speaking in person”. Data from online speeches
provides the ability to assess the effective use of eye gaze, since there
is a universal viewing angle of the speech by all online members.
Body gesture and use of stage are important for online speeches.
In open discussion, four of the six interviewees thought the impact
of the screen in online interactions for body language was especially
important. However, some of them also mentioned the difficulty of
keeping various motions within the limited space of screen. This also
reflects the importance of the proper use of “stage” in the camera. DE2
questioned: “You are the director with a fixed camera. Do you need
to show your full body above your waist? ” Online speaking enables
accurate calculation of stage and gesture occlusion by providing a
consistent camera angle, unlike offline speech where the audience’s
viewing angles vary.
T exual
Data Collection Module
F eatur e Extr action Module
F act or A nalysis Module
Recommendation Module
Visual Inter face
F acial Expr ession
Visual V ocal
E y e Contact
Use of Stage
Body Gestur e
P aceV oice
Script
Video Metadata Contest Info
A v er age V olatility
Div ersity
Ratio
Div ersion
Script
F act or Sentence
Speech
Recommendation Mode Gr anularity Le v el
F act or
P anel
A
Mirr or
P anel
DSpeak er P anel
B
Time Slice P anel
C
F act or
E ff ectiv eness
A nalysis
Fig. 2: System architecture of SpeechMirror.
Emotion plays an important role in public speaking. In our interview
survey, emotion related factors ranked high in the list while emotional
diversity was ranked the most important factor by interviewees. Emo-
tion can be explicitly expressed by the speakers’ facial expression,
voice and text content. In our review of several methods of extracting
vocal and textual emotion, we found them less accurate than the facial
expression results, even with the state-of-the-art models. Therefore,
this work mainly focuses on facial expressions.
Vocal characteristics include voice volume, pitch, speaking rate,
and pauses. Proper speaking rate and pauses are difficult because there
is no feedback from the audience in the online contest. DA1 stated
“Faces of the audience are not shown, and no audio reply is allowed. You
don’t know if the audience gets your points or joke, and can’t change
without feedback.” While volume and pitch were not mentioned by
the interviewees, they are commonly considered important in public
speaking literature. Online speakers are required to have good volume
management skills to control their speaking volume.
4 S YSTEM AND DATA
4.1 System Overview
We design and implement a visual analytic system, SpeechMirror, to
fulfill the analytical goal and the design considerations. Our system
integrates raw video data, extracted multimodal feature data, speech
factors and corresponding effectiveness data to provide a complete data
processing and analyzing workflow. All data except the raw video is
stored in MongoDB for fast access.
As illustrated in Figure 2, our system consists of five major modules.
The Data Collection Module contains the speech videos and informa-
tion we collected for analysis. The newly input video will also be
stored in the module. The Feature Extraction Module extracts features
from the input video, including visual, vocal and textual modalities.
The Factor Analysis Module determines speech factors based on the
extracted features and further estimates the effectiveness of factors. The
Recommendation Module searches for the most similar and different
speeches from the video collection. The Visual Interface provides visu-
alizations of data and interactions to support analysis. The interface is
designed and implemented in a browser-server architecture, utilizing
d3.js [8] for creating visualizations in the front-end interface, and Flask
framework [41] for providing web services on the back-end.
4.2 Data Collection Module
We manually collected a collection of speech videos in the World
Championship of Public Speaking (WCPS) contest from public online
platforms like YouTube. The entire online speech video collection in
our system contains 102 videos in total. Each speech is about 7 minutes
long and of good visual-audio quality. We recorded the metadata
(including the start and end of each speech in the video), and contest
information (including region, year, level, and rank). Whether the video
is delivered online or offline was also labeled.
4.3 Feature Extraction Module
To assist users with quantitative analysis of presentation techniques,
the feature extraction module takes video as input and automatically
extracts and processes features for further analysis. The module extracts
4
© 2023 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/
the following speech-related features from multimodal inputs including
visual, vocal, and textual. The multimodal features are aligned based
on the timestamps of the script’s words.
• Facial expression: The face of speaker in each frame is detected by
face_recognition [19] and clustered out from other faces by DBSCAN
[17]. We apply AffectNet [36] to predict valence and arousal values
(ranging from [-1, 1]) from face images. AffectNet is a widely used
baseline method for predicting facial expression, valence and arousal
from images in the wild. A convolutional neural network [2] is used
to classify face images into seven classic emotion categories [20].
• Eye contact: We apply OpenFace Toolkit [3, 63] to estimate the eye
gaze direction of both eyes. The eye gaze direction of each eye is
represented as a normalized 3D vector in world coordinates. Average
eye gaze direction is converted to radians in world coordinates. The
angle of watching the camera is calculated by averaging the angle
obtained from the 3D position vector of the eyes relative to the
camera and the vector of the eye gaze direction.
• Body gesture: We adopt MMPose [12], a widely used open-source
toolbox for pose estimation, to predict the 2D body keypoints from
videos. We use Faster R-CNN model [46] with a ResNet-50-FPN
backbone for human bounding box detection. HRNet [55] pre-trained
on COCO [31] detects 2D keypoints from video frames with the
Human3.6M [24] format. We set up rules to retain the body keypoints
of the speaker. We calculate the kinetic energy [37] of the speaker’s
upper body as the gesture energy based on the offset of the keypoints
in adjacent frames and the mass distribution of human body [42].
Gesture diversity is determined by the standard deviation of the
cosine distances between the upper body keypoints of each frame
and the first frame. The body keypoints are first aligned by the thorax
and normalized to a fixed width of shoulder.
• Use of stage: We utilize thez-axis position of the speaker’s head rela-
tive to the camera estimated by OpenFace Toolkit [3], as the distance
between the speaker and the camera. The position of the speaker
in the video frame is determined by the center of the bounding box
detected by MMPose during body gesture extraction.
• Voice: The loudness and pitch data is extracted by Parselmouth [25],
a Python library for Praat [7] which is a widely used speech analysis
software in phonetics. We use the “sound to intensity” and “sound
to pitch” functions to capture the loudness (in dB) and frequency (in
Hz) of a speech, respectively.
• Pace: We compute the pauses between different words and different
sentences according to the timestamps of each sentence and word.
The speaking rate is determined by the duration per syllable of each
word. The syllable of word is counted by the vowel sounds in a word
with the CMUdict corpus [27] in NLTK Language Toolkit [5].
• Script: Each video is transcribed by Azure Cognitive Speech to Text
Service [35] with timestamps of each sentence and word. We use
the Universal Sentence Encoder [10] to encode script texts into 512
dimensional vectors while maintaining the semantic information.
4.4 Factor Analysis Module
The visual and vocal features extracted from the videos are time series,
which are difficult for understanding and comparison. Considering the
domain requirements, we calculate the factors as shown in Table 1.
The methods of factor calculation are as follows:Averagerepresents
the mean value of data over time. Volatility, representing data change
over time, is calculated using the CID algorithm [4] with normalization.
CID measures the complexity of time-series data, capturing patterns
like peaks and valleys. Dispersion is determined by the variance of
the time-series data, obtained by dividing the standard deviation by the
mean. Ratio of watching camera indicates the proportion of frames
that the speaker is looking directly at the camera within a 5-degree
angle. Diversity of facial expression type represents the variety and
relative abundance of the emotions [44]. The time-series emotion type
data are represented as D = {dt }T
t=1, where dt indicates the t-th sample
of emotion type data. Let ri denote the proportion of the same emotion
type as di in D. Diversity is calculated in diversity = ∑T
i=1(ri ×lnri).
With the speech factors and contest placements of speeches indi-
cating speech effectiveness, we build the effectiveness relationship of
each factor with a regression method [22]. Specifically, we conducted
parallel line tests and observed significance with p < 0.05. Then a
multi-class ordinal regression is employed to evaluate the significance
of speech factor effectiveness and the regression results are presented
in Table 1. We predict the effectiveness of each factor based on its
significant relationship with speech effectiveness.
4.5 Recommendation Module
To enable users to quickly find the presentation examples that are similar
or different to the speech for analysis (DC2), our system recommends
relevant speeches from our data collection for their reference.
The recommendation module grants users the option to manually
select from two granularity levels (speech or sentence) and two rec-
ommendation modes (factor or script) through the interface. The
granularity levels determine the extent of the search range, which spans
either the entire speeches or individual sentences. The recommendation
modes dictate the method of similarity calculation, which can either
rely on speech factors or the transcribed script content.
The recommendation consists of three steps: (1) Prepare the query
and candidate data. The module calculates the query data of selected
period in the analyzed speech, as well as the data of candidates accord-
ing to the selected granularity level. (2) Extract the feature vectors for
both query and candidates. For the factor recommendation mode, we
join the values of the factors selected on the interface into a vector after
a min-max normalization. For the script recommendation mode, we
use the textual semantic embedding vectors for both input and candi-
date scripts. (3) Fetch the most similar or different candidates to the
query. We calculate the similarity distances between the query and the
candidates by Euclidean distance for vectors in the factor mode and
cosine distance for vectors in the script mode. Heap queue algorithm is
used to obtain the results with largest or smallest similarity.
5 U SER INTERFACE DESIGN
In this section, we introduce the general principles for design, the
interface, and visualization designs.
The design of our visualizations aimed to be intuitively understood
by an audience with minimal visualization literacy, which would allow
our interface to be used by a wider audience with minimal training.
We iterated our design closely with potential users and in the process
created design principles that guided our work. In our initial designs
we found significant difficulty in understanding the concepts in our in-
terface. In order to increase the intuitiveness of our system, we sought
design principles that followed several principles given by Blair et
al. [6] and reflections by Böttinger et al. [9], including: (DP1) making
consistent use of visual elements, (DP2) providing elements in prox-
imity to the content, (DP3) offering interactions as direct with content
as possible, (DP4) showing understandable explanatory visualizations
to a broader audience. The design alternatives in our design iteration
process are introduced in Section. 4.1 of the supplemental material.
5.1 Icons and Color Encodings
Repetition of elements in the design of icons, as shown in Figure 3,
was used to both aid in the understanding of intricate concepts and used
throughout the three panels in the system to allow rapid understanding.
(DP1) The icons were designed as pictographs that resemble the con-
cepts they are linked to. For example, the position of a speaker on the
screen was given by a figure icon surrounded by a screen.
We applied consistent use of color encoding for effectiveness across
the three panels of our interface using a diverging color scale that em-
phasizes the data of two extremes, as shown in Figure 1 (A1). (DP1)
This color scheme is a scale with dark red signifying very low effective-
ness metrics to a dark blue signifying very high effectiveness metrics. A
light gray is used to indicate factors that were not significantly related to
effectiveness. Another color encoding scheme for emotion is employed
in SpeechTwin, which will be further introduced in subsubsection 5.3.1.
5.2 Interface Panels
Our interface is composed of four panels that support the design con-
siderations as described in subsection 3.2.
5
Fig. 3: Consistently used icons for the presentation techniques.
The Factor Panel presents an overall view of factors that appear in
a speech, and how they relate to all speeches in our video collection
(DC1), as shown in Figure 1-A. The 23 speech factors considered in
our study are categorized into 6 groups of presentation techniques. The
panel provides a summary of the factors when a group is closed, and
more detailed information when opened. Each factor is represented
by colored icons and text that indicate its effectiveness, as explained
in subsection 5.1. (DP4) When a user hovers over a factor, the factor
effectiveness board (A2) will be displayed, showing the effectiveness
trend and the factor distribution in the video collection. Factors selected
in this panel will filter the results in the other three panels. If no factor
is selected, then the aggregated results of all factors are shown.
The Speaker Panel supports understanding speaking techniques
with direct reference to the original context in the video. The techniques
are visually presented, overlaid on the video with reference to the
regions they correspond to. Users can directly interact with the layered
visualizations to focus on a specific technique, thereby displaying the
presentation technique board (B1). Data shown in the panel comes
from the current playing sentence. Once a factor is focused, more
detailed information about the use of the factor is shown, as well as a
recommendation of speeches for reference (DC2). Users are allowed
to play the recommended videos and set one to the comparison video.
The comparison video will be displayed at the top-right corner of the
Speaker Panel and can be switched to the main video in the panel.
The Time Slice Panel enables users to select different parts of a
speech, as well as provides different views of speech data with script
context over time ( DC3, DC4), as shown in Figure 1-C. At the top
of the panel, the timeline (C1) shows the use of selected factors over
time. Each rectangle represents a sentence, with the color encoded
as described in subsection 5.1. White blanks indicate the intervals
between sentences. A brush tool is provided for convenient selection
of speech periods on the timeline. The selected period is divided into 8
time slices, using glyphs (C2) to show more detailed use of the factor
and raw data. At the panel bottom is a text module (C3) highlighting
the effectiveness of factors in reference to the speech script. Words that
coincide with the time slice segmentation points are split into two parts
based on time, allowing for a better comprehension of the speaking
pace within shorter selected time periods.
The Mirror Panel allows speakers to find the most similar and
most different speeches compared to the whole or a part of a speech
(DC2), as shown in Figure 1-D. At the top of the panel, a visual sum-
mary of speech factors (D1) for the selected part of the speech, named
SpeechTwin, is presented to facilitate quick comprehension of speech
factors. Below, the panel demonstrates the SpeechTwins of similar
and different speeches (D2) according to the selected recommendation
mode and granularity level (D3). Hovering over a SpeechTwin will
trigger the speech comparison board (D4) while clicking on it will
set the speech as the comparison video. Users are allowed to switch
between the original video and the comparison video by clicking the
video name located at the panel top.
5.3 Visual Design
5.3.1 SpeechTwin: A Multimodal Speech Summary
Our system provides a visual summary of crucial speech techniques in
an intuitive way by mapping the technique to symbols on a figure (DC5,
DP2). We display the visual encoding used and the demonstration
of SpeechTwin in Figure 4. More demonstrations are shown in the
supplemental material (Sect. 4.2) and supplemental video for reference.
Facial and vocal data are represented on a Chernoff face [11], which
allow these features to be combined and closely associated with cor-
responding facial regions. Eye gaze direction is communicated by the
angle the eyes are looking at (Figure 4 A-V). The positivity or nega-
tivity of facial expression, namely valence, is given by the upward or
downward turn of the mouth as a smile or frown (A-III). The intensity
Fig. 4: SpeechTwin: a novel visualization of multimodal speech summary.
of facial expression, arousal, is conveyed by the protrusion of spikes
outside the face, as inspired by the coding of arousal in shape [52]
(A-II). The emotional diversity is indicated by the area of face given
to emotions (A-I), with a neutral gray emotion in the center, and other
emotions shown in the area of the outside circle and with different
colors displaying different emotions (Figure 4 B). The loudness of
voice is represented by the width of the mouth (A-IV). The eyes and
the mouth maintain a fixed proportion in relation to the face. To ensure
the readability of the elements inside the face in rare cases of scarce
neutral emotion, we set a minimum size to the face.
To better describe various gestures in the speech while minimizing
visual distractions, the representative body gestures are given in the
arms and shoulders of SpeechTwin. The upper body keypoints of the
speaker in each frame are aligned by the position of the thorax, and
normalized to a fixed shoulder width. Inspired by PoseTrans [26], we
use a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) to classify the poses into 10
clusters. We identify the pose with the smallest sum of cosine distances
to all other poses in the cluster as the most representative one. We
visualize the most representative gestures with the opacity indicating
the amount of gestures in the corresponding cluster (A-VII).
The use of the stage is described by the “footprints” or dots beneath
the character, with each dot representing the center of the speaker’s
bounding box on the screen (A-VI).
Hovering over a SpeechTwin in the Mirror Panel (Figure 1-D2) will
trigger the speech comparison board (D4). On the board all factors of
the compared speaker are contrasted with the original speaker. Factor
differences between the speeches are shown on a bar chart, with the
higher differences polarized at the top and the bottom. The placement
of the speech in the contest is also shown.
5.3.2 SpeechPlayer: An Augmented Speech Video Player
Considering the potential information omission when viewing speech
videos, we offer SpeechPlayer (Figure 1-B), an interactive approach to
enhancing users’ understanding of techniques during video playback,
as well as augmenting their sense of expressive possibilities (DC4).
SpeechPlayer integrates the visualization elements of critical presen-
tation techniques directly in the video feed. (DP2, DP3) The facemark
keypoints are displayed on the video frame to emphasize the facial
expressions of the speaker (Figure 1-B4). The direction of eye gaze is
depicted through a ray, which becomes increasingly transparent along
the direction of the gaze (B3). We found with traditional methods of an
opaque line, confusion about the direction of eye gaze can occur when
viewing eye gaze over time, such as when speakers change their head
angle to act different characters. The skeleton of the speaker’s upper
body (B5) and the bounding box of the speaker (B2) are also visualized
to enhance the understanding of body gestures and the positions in
video frames.
To enhance the understanding of eye gaze and body gestures across
time, SpeechPlayer displays 10 skeletons and eye gaze rays at fixed
time intervals. The transparency of color corresponds to the temporal
6
© 2023 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/
Fig. 5: Demonstration of modality feature visualizations.
proximity to the current playback time, with higher opacity indicating
closer proximity to the current time.
Users can interact directly with the displayed elements on Speech-
Player, and hovering allows analysis of a group of presentation tech-
niques with the presentation technique board (Figure 1-B1). Users
can choose a speech factor of interest, and compare the distribution
of the factor values of the currently played sentence with the average
factor value of best speeches and all speeches ( DC1). Speeches or
sentences that have the most similar and most different use of a factor
are recommended so users can rapidly find reference samples (DC2).
5.3.3 Visualizations of Multimodal Features
We offer visualizations in the Time Slice Panel to illustrate the temporal
details of modality features. These visualizations are tailored to the
specific nature of original feature, as shown in Figure 5.
For each feature in facial expressions, we use visualization methods
consistent with SpeechTwin, as shown in Figure 5-A, B and C respec-
tively. (DP1) In an informative visual summary of gaze patterns, a
gaze heatmap is used to depict the frequency of eye gaze directions.
Darker shades on the heatmap indicate higher frequencies. To better
understand body gestures, we considered several visualization methods
as mentioned in subsection 2.3. Balancing between the need for sim-
plicity and complexity of gestures in a large number of video frames,
we display representative gestures that provide an uncluttered view of
representative gestures, as shown in Figure 5-G. The data in each time
slice are aggregated to summarize the features.
We offer two visualizations to depict the use of stage techniques. To
understand the speaker’s positions in the video frame, we display the
centers of speaker’s bounding boxes in each time slice within a rectan-
gular area, as shown in Figure 5-F. This allows us to observe the range
of speaker’s position changes throughout the time slice. Additionally,
we apply a scatter plot to illustrate the changes in distance between the
speaker and camera over time in the selected speech period.
For the features in the voice technique, we use a scatter plot to
visualize volume and pitch data along time referring to the work of
Schaefer et al. [49], as illustrated in Figure 5-H. We map the x-axis as
the timeline, with the y-axis representing pitch, and the radius of each
point indicating volume. Users can observe the changes in volume and
pitch over time directly through this chart.
5.4 Interactions
The proposed system, SpeechMirror, enhances users’ analysis abilities
while maintaining intuitiveness and fluency through various ways of
interaction within the four linked panels of the system. (DP3) Here we
summarize the supported interactions:
Clicking. In the Time Slice Panel, clicking a word within the text
module will trigger the video in the Speaker Panel to jump to the
corresponding start time of the word. Double-clicking the word will
select the sentence that contains the word on the timeline. Users are
allowed to activate the comparison video in the Speaker Panel by
clicking the SpeechTwin in the Mirror Panel. Clicking on the video will
play or pause the comparison video, and double-clicking will switch the
video in Speaker Panel to the comparison speech, along with changing
the corresponding visualizations in the Time Slice Panel.
Selecting. Our system enables users to select any factor or a group
of factors in a feature for analysis in the Factor Panel. The selection of a
factor will result in the Time Slice Panel switching to the corresponding
factor data, and the SpeechTwin of the analyzed video in the Mirror
Panel being refreshed, thus generating new recommendations. Users
are allowed to select different recommendation modes and different
granularity levels with the toggle buttons in the Mirror Panel.
Hovering. Hovering on the histogram in the Factor Panel displays
the factor effectiveness board, while hovering over the data view in
the Speaker Panel reveals the presentation technique board for more
detailed information. In the Time Slice Panel, when users hover over
the line chart of factor distribution, the time-aggregated data of the
hovered feature will be shown above. Furthermore, when users hover
over the SpeechTwin in the Mirror Panel, a new panel will be shown to
reveal the difference between factor values of the speakers.
Dragging and Brushing. In the Time Slice Panel, users can drag the
white triangle on the timeline to change the play position on the video.
Users can brush a selection area on the timeline or drag the selected
area to focus on a sequence of sentences. The Time Slice Panel and the
Mirror Panel will refresh accordingly.
6 E VALUATION
We aim to evaluate the proposed system and visualizations in two
scenarios based on the framework introduced by Lam et al. [30]: user
experience (UE) and visual data analysis and reasoning (VDAR). We
used a user experience questionnaire and a follow-up interview to elicit
the subjective feedback and opinions on our system and visualizations
(UE). A case study is used to demonstrate how users explore data and
find insights with our system (VDAR).
6.1 Study Design and Procedure
A user study was designed to assess the performance of our system and
visualizations in the two scenarios.
Since experts and amateurs in public speaking are the target users of
our system, we aimed to gain insight into their diverse usage patterns
and perceptions of the system. For amateur participants, we requested
their recent online public speaking videos for analysis in the evaluation.
Expert participants were asked to analyze a speech from our data
collection to simulate critiquing a student’s speech as a coach.
The procedure of our evaluation study was split into three sessions.
The whole study lasted about 90-100 minutes.
Introduction. We first introduced the main goal and background
of our system. After obtaining informed consent from the participants
and collecting their personal information, we provided a detailed intro-
duction of the important concepts to facilitate their understanding and
utilization during subsequent sessions. By means of quick questioning,
we confirmed that participants had fully understood the concepts we
presented. The introduction session took about 20 minutes.
Exploration. The user study contains two phases for the participants
to explore our system: user tasks and free analysis. We guided the users
to complete the user tasks while we observed their use of our system
and assessed usability. The free analysis phase aims to observe how
7
Fig. 6: Questions and results of our user experience questionnaire. The
white overlay in the bars indicates the Mean ±SD. The target of each
question is indicated by the labels in Figure 1.
participants analyze speeches with our system by allowing them to use
the system on their own. They were encouraged to think aloud while
using the system and voice their findings during the analysis. Both
phases took about 30 minutes.
Reflection. Based on their experience with the system, participants
were requested to complete a user experience questionnaire, and were
encouraged to provide their opinions for each question. We further
conducted a follow-up interview to gather additional feedback and
insights about our system and its potential actual applications. This
session took about 10 minutes.
6.2 Participants
We recruited 8 participants for the evaluation: four experts (EE1 -
EE4) and four amateurs (EA1 - EA4) in public speaking. None of
the participants participated in the previous domain interviews. The
experts all have more than 3 years in coaching for public speaking and
have participated in the contest. The amateurs did not coach public
speaking as an occupation, and all had participated in the contest. The
participants were compensated for $94 per expert user and $54 per
amateur user. Detailed information of the participants in the user study
is provided in the Sect. 5.1 of the supplemental material.
6.3 User Experience Questionnaire
A user experience questionnaire was employed to assess the partici-
pants’ subjective feedback of our system and visualization approaches
(UE). We adopted a 7-point Likert scale to score the experiences of
participants. The questions with their evaluation target and correspond-
ing scores are illustrated in Figure 6. We present the ratings of all
participants for each question in the supplemental material.
In general, participants appreciated that our system helped them
become aware of the usage of presentation techniques in speeches
(Q1) and discover new ways of expression (Q2). On both of these
questions, our system received an average score of 5.81 out of 7, which
indicates the participants’ overall acceptance of SpeechMirror. For
the usefulness and user-friendliness of use of different parts of our
system (Q3-Q20), we received an average score of 5.69, indicating the
participants’ general approval of the methods we adopted.
The participants acknowledged the usefulness of our system, with an
average score of 6.01/7 for usability. Specifically, the participants were
satisfied with the usefulness of viewing techniques over time (Q17 for
the Time Slice Panel and the visualizations of modality features) and the
summary of presentation techniques (Q19 for the SpeechTwin). One
amateur participant rated 3/7 on the usefulness of the Speaker Panel and
SpeechPlayer (Q11), while other participants provided positive ratings.
She suggested providing an option to enhance the original video with
an on/off toggle or in a separate window.
The participants’ satisfaction with the ease of use was lower, with an
average score of 5.38. There are two questions in our questionnaire that
were rated below 5.0 on average. The concept of factor effectiveness
and related charts required more effort to understand for participants,
especially those without a STEM background. Additionally, providing
users with multiple factors could also result in cognitive burden, as
users reported feeling unsure about where to start exploring factors.
(Q4 for the Factor Panel) Recommendation based on speech content
was rated as 4.63. Several participants found the recommendation
results inaccurate. This is likely due to our limited database and lack of
samples for comparison. (Q10 for the Mirror Panel)
6.4 Follow-up Interview
We conducted a semi-structured interview to gather further feedback
and insights on SpeechMirror from the participants (UE).
Factor Analysis. Our system received positive feedback on pro-
viding nearly comprehensive speech effectiveness analysis. EA3 said
“It is amazing to be aware of so many factors. I didn’t imagine this
was possible.” EE3 commented that “all these factors are very useful”.
EE4 considered the analysis of our system to be very interesting. Af-
ter watching the whole speech of his “student”, he confirmed that the
result of our system matched his judgment of the speech as an expert
coach. However, EA1 mentioned feeling information overload, feeling
“overwhelmed due to a lot of factors”.
Speech Recommendation. The participants appreciated the recom-
mendation function since it took less effort to find other speeches for
comparison. EA2 said that “I have never thought about who is the most
similar or different to myself. Before, it was hard for me to find someone
to compare to.” EE1 and EE2 both mentioned that the SpeechTwin
demonstrated the “speech style”, allowing users to compare it with
others and “find a personalized speech style”. EE2 and EA1 stated the
benefit of the Mirror Panel and SpeechTwin in enabling users to “find a
comparison and reference” and “know who to learn from”.
System Complexity. The participants indicated a preference for
a simplified system to improve user experience, suggesting that the
current system is overly complex. EE1 reported a high learning curve
and instead wished for more “visual reminders for key functions and
terms.” EA2 and EA3, with non-STEM backgrounds, also suggested
adding tooltips in the system for better understanding. EE4 suggested a
potential simplification of the interface by “filtering the most important
elements”. EA2 and EE4 observed that the text script within the Time
Slice Panel was not very legible, potentially because there were too few
words on each line in each slice.
Potential Application. In the interview, we gathered valuable in-
sights from the participants regarding the potential applications of our
system. We also observed a notable level of anticipation for further
utilization of the system. EE3 stated that she planned to have stu-
dents review the system-generated results and analyze presentation
techniques with the system in tandem with her class material. EA3
noted “I want to put all my speech videos into the system and see where
to improve. The system directly tells me how differently others present,
so I can learn from others ”. We see a promising application in the
future of our system or other similar systems.
6.5 Case Study
During the free exploration phase of our evaluation, both experts and
amateurs found unexpected uses of SpeechMirror (VDAR). We provide
more details in our supplemental document (Section 5.5) and video.
6.5.1 Expert user: Coaching with SpeechMirror
EE1, a district champion for the Toastmasters speech evaluation contest
and a university and youth speech coach noticed from the Factor Panel
that the speaker he was analyzing had exceptionally low arousal, most
similar to speakers at the club level. He then used the Mirror Panel
to find one of the most different SpeechTwins. He noted the speaker
was the previous year’s world 2nd place winner. He then switched the
video to the comparison video and used the timeline to find a moment
of especially high arousal. After noticing the changes in arousal over
time, he said “I think the tool could be very useful. In order to build a
connection to the audience, you need contrast, you need the twists and
turns of emotions. Then you can elicit emotions of the audience. I can
use this to show my student that there is strong contrast [for this expert
speaker]. I could let the student see where they are and compare with
8
© 2023 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/
different speakers.” While EE1’s mouse was hovering on a SpeechTwin
with a smooth spread of positional footprints, EE1 added, “ With the
SpeechTwin we can see where they are and compare with the other
speakers to see possibilities.”
He then moved his mouse to indicate a SpeechTwin with a smooth
distribution of footprints and commented “this speaker had constant
stage movement.” He then pointed at a SpeechTwin with a clear three
part distribution of footprints, stating “if like this there is a clear stage
design”. He noted the possible use of our system for coaching, “Overall
I feel like this is a tool that I could use and discuss with my students
and find out different insights so that they can improve.”
6.5.2 Amateur user: Improving with SpeechMirror
EA2 was a previous district contestant that had attended 2-5 online
contests. During evaluation, she used our system to better observe
changes in her valence and to find more possibilities of improving her
gestures. She first noted that while overall, the average valence in her
face was indicated by the system as performing well, the system found
her speech most similar to someone that was smiling throughout their
speech. She guessed it might be that her sadness wasn’t expressed
obviously enough. When looking at the Time Slice panel, she observed
that the ending of the speech was happy, “This is correct.” However,
she then pointed to earlier time slices in her speech “For these two parts
I really wanted to show my sadness, my anger, but I guess I failed.”
While comparing by selecting both the valence average and gesture
energy change, she stated “I want to see who is the most similar to me.”
She selected the most similar speech, noting that the gestures, similar
to hers, were mostly below the screen or on the screen border.
She then looked at the Mirror Panel to find the most different speaker.
When she played the video, she saw a speaker that had many different
gestures and stage changes. While looking at the speech comparison
board to compare to her speech across factors, she noted “Ahhh... much
more pose diversity than me.” With the Mirror Panel EA2 was quickly
able to find speakers that use gestures very differently, more often over
the border of the screen, and with a wider variety.
7 D ISCUSSION
In this section, we discuss the lessons learned in our research, the
limitations of our work, and the implications for future work.
Analysis of Online Public Speaking. Our system has received high
appreciation from domain users for its ability to evaluate and analyze
online speech techniques. This demonstrates the value and potential
of our system. Users have also expressed their expectation for addi-
tional features and capabilities in our system. Most of the participants
mentioned that a report of the analysis results can offer an intuitive
understanding of a speech, alleviate the analysis burden for users, and
provide clear guidance for future exploration. Our system can be further
simplified for better user experience by putting less on the interface.
Improving text visualization and analysis is a potential area for future
work, addressing SpeechMirror’s limitations in readability and support-
ing advanced analysis. This can be achieved through exploring text
feature analysis and incorporating text visualizations [29].
Visualization of Human Body Language.We have employed novel
approaches to visualize data in different modalities of presentation
techniques. Combining multiple modalities of data to provide a unified
visualization analysis while preserving the distinctive characteristics of
each modality poses significant challenges. Balancing the amount of
information and complexity in multimodal visualization requires further
consideration. Additionally, the color-emotion mapping scheme in our
system may hinder visual accessibility, particularly for individuals with
red-green color blindness. To address this, an optional color scheme
is provided in Section 4.3 of the supplementary material, enabling
individuals with color blindness to utilize our system.
Scope of Presentation Techniques. We are compiling a compre-
hensive list of speech techniques for users to explore and improve, and
it’s been positively received. However, domain experts have suggested
more techniques to consider. Our evaluation revealed that background
scenery, lighting, and visual aids are crucial for online speeches. Ex-
tracting these features requires further investigation. Initial attempts to
detect prop usage via human-object interaction models [18,70] had sub-
optimal outcomes due to the limited recognizable objects and interac-
tion classes. As relevant models advances, we expect more presentation
techniques to be quantified and analyzed in future work. Expanding on
body gestures in our work, advances in hand pose estimation [14, 60]
enable the analysis of hand gestures in public speaking.
Recommendation of Speeches. The recommendation function in
our system simplifies the process of discovering new videos for users,
and has been well-received by our participants. More recommendation
approaches can be further considered, such as based on the themes or
topics of speeches, on the placements of speeches, or on other tags for
users to filter. Moreover, recommendations made by fusing multimodal
raw features of presentation techniques could be promising.
Model Accuracy. We utilized state-of-the-art models for multi-
modal feature extraction. However, apart from the aforementioned
limitations regarding the extraction of presentation techniques, we ob-
served inaccuracies of the models in certain situations. For instance,
when a webcam is positioned too low, capturing an upward-facing view
of the speaker’s face, it can result in inaccurate eye gaze and facial
emotion recognition. Overall, our models meet practical accuracy re-
quirements, but the performance can be enhanced by incorporating
more precise feature extraction models. For the factor effectiveness
estimation model, we may explore more precise models or models
that consider multiple factors simultaneously. To address potential
inaccuracies, we suggest introducing uncertainty visualization in future
research. Accurately assessing and visually encoding uncertainty may
pose significant challenges.
Volume of Data. SpeechMirror is the first visual analytics system
that analyzes the effectiveness of speeches and recommends speech
samples based on a collection of videos. We anticipate that as the vol-
ume of speech video data increases, our effectiveness estimation model
will generate more accurate and robust results. With larger volume
of video, the system will also provide more diverse recommendation
results in both expression and speech content.
Generalization of Our Methods. Our work focuses on online
speech contests in the WCPS. Our work can also be extended to other
speaking and presentation scenarios in the future. Furthermore, one
participant in the evaluation (EE1) suggested that our system could be
adapted and applied to other fields that require the analysis of body
language, such as behavior analysis during suspect interrogations.
Privacy Issue. SpeechMirror provides users with other speakers’
speech videos as a basis for analysis, which inevitably raises privacy
concerns for the speakers. Therefore, we obtain the consent of the
speakers in actual usage and restrict users’ access to the data and
system. However, when deploying similar systems in public use, ethical
considerations should be addressed. It is also important to consider the
potential for imitation and plagiarism of presentation techniques with
such systems, which requires further exploration in future work.
8 C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose SpeechMirror, a visual analytics system for
public speaking experts and amateurs to evaluate a speech and explore
potential improvements. Our system is the first to evaluate speaker
performance on a single speech for speaking techniques and provide
an in-depth analysis using a comprehensive set of factors, allowing
users to identify and understand areas for improvement of their speech.
Additionally, the system recommends users speeches by similarity and
difference of techniques and content to enhance their understanding of
different ways of expression. Novel visualizations are employed for
intuitive understanding of presentation techniques. We designed the
system based on insights from literature review and domain interviews.
A user study was conducted to evaluate the system, indicating the
effectiveness of our system in user experience and gaining insights.
In future work, we plan to further improve our system in usability and
functionality based on the aforementioned reflections on our system,
including (1) making the interface easier to use, (2) expanding the
scope of presentation techniques, (3) improving the accuracy of models.
Furthermore, we intend to promote our system for applications and
collect more speech data for more potential research.
9
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank our domain collaborators and the anonymous review-
ers for their constructive comments. This work was supported by the
National Key R&D Program of China (2022ZD0117900) and Beijing
Natural Science Foundation (4212029).
REFERENCES
[1] O. Alemi, P. Pasquier, and C. Shaw. Mova: Interactive movement analytics
platform. In Proceedings of the 2014 International Workshop on Move-
ment and Computing, MOCO ’14, p. 37–42. Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY , USA, 2014. doi: 10.1145/2617995.2618002 3
[2] O. Arriaga, M. Valdenegro-Toro, and P. Plöger. Real-time convolutional
neural networks for emotion and gender classification. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.07557, 2017. 5
[3] T. Baltrusaitis, A. Zadeh, Y . C. Lim, and L.-P. Morency. Openface 2.0:
Facial behavior analysis toolkit. In 2018 13th IEEE International Confer-
ence on Automatic Face Gesture Recognition (FG 2018), pp. 59–66, 2018.
doi: 10.1109/FG.2018.00019 5
[4] G. E. Batista, E. J. Keogh, O. M. Tataw, and V . de Souza. Cid: an efficient
complexity-invariant distance for time series.Data Mining and Knowledge
Discovery, 28(3):634–669, 2014. 5
[5] S. Bird, E. Klein, and E. Loper. Natural language processing with Python:
analyzing text with the natural language toolkit. “O’Reilly Media, Inc.",
2009. 5
[6] A. Blair-Early and M. Zender. User interface design principles for interac-
tion design. Design Issues, 24(3):85–107, 2008. 5
[7] P. Boersma and D. Weenink. Praat: doing phonetics by computer
[Computer program]. Version 6.1.38, retrieved 2 January 2021 http:
//www.praat.org/, 2021. 5
[8] M. Bostock, V . Ogievetsky, and J. Heer. D³ data-driven documents. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 17(12):2301–2309,
2011. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2011.185 4
[9] M. Böttinger, H.-N. Kostis, M. Velez-Rojas, P. Rheingans, and A. Ynner-
man. Reflections on visualization for broad audiences. Foundations of
data visualization, pp. 297–305, 2020. 5
[10] D. Cer, Y . Yang, S.-y. Kong, N. Hua, N. Limtiaco, R. S. John, N. Constant,
M. Guajardo-Cespedes, S. Yuan, C. Tar, et al. Universal sentence encoder.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.11175, 2018. 5
[11] H. Chernoff. The use of faces to represent points in k-dimensional space
graphically. Journal of the American statistical Association, 68(342):361–
368, 1973. 6
[12] M. Contributors. Openmmlab pose estimation toolbox and benchmark.
https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmpose, 2022. 5
[13] S. D’Angelo and D. Gergle. An eye for design: gaze visualizations for
remote collaborative work. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1–12, 2018. 3
[14] X. Deng, D. Zuo, Y . Zhang, Z. Cui, J. Cheng, P. Tan, L. Chang, M. Polle-
feys, S. Fanello, and H. Wang. Recurrent 3d hand pose estimation using
cascaded pose-guided 3d alignments. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Anal-
ysis and Machine Intelligence, 45(1):932–945, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI
.2022.3159725 9
[15] J. Donovan and R. Avery. Speaker, Leader, Champion: Succeed at
Work Through the Power of Public Speaking, featuring the prize-winning
speeches of Toastmasters World Champions. McGraw Hill Professional,
2014. 3
[16] V . Echeverría, A. Avendaño, K. Chiluiza, A. Vásquez, and X. Ochoa.
Presentation skills estimation based on video and kinect data analysis. In
Proceedings of the 2014 ACM Workshop on Multimodal Learning Analyt-
ics Workshop and Grand Challenge, MLA ’14, p. 53–60. Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY , USA, 2014. doi: 10.1145/2666633
.2666641 1, 2
[17] M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, and X. Xu. A density-based algorithm
for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise. In Proceed-
ings of the Second International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, KDD’96, p. 226–231. AAAI Press, 1996. 5
[18] D. C. Frederic Z. Zhang and S. Gould. Spatially conditioned graphs for
detecting human–object interactions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 13319–13327,
October 2021. 9
[19] A. Geitgey. face_recognition. https://github.com/ageitgey/face_
recognition, 2018. 5
[20] I. J. Goodfellow, D. Erhan, P. L. Carrier, A. Courville, M. Mirza, B. Ham-
ner, W. Cukierski, Y . Tang, D. Thaler, D.-H. Lee, et al. Challenges in
representation learning: A report on three machine learning contests. In
International conference on neural information processing, pp. 117–124.
Springer, 2013. 5
[21] E. P. Green. Presenting virtually. In Healthy Presentations, pp. 87–100.
Springer, 2021. 1
[22] P. A. Gutiérrez, M. Perez-Ortiz, J. Sanchez-Monedero, F. Fernandez-
Navarro, and C. Hervas-Martinez. Ordinal regression methods: survey
and experimental study. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering, 28(1):127–146, 2015. 5
[23] K. Higuchi, S. Matsuda, R. Kamikubo, T. Enomoto, Y . Sugano, J. Ya-
mamoto, and Y . Sato. Visualizing gaze direction to support video coding
of social attention for children with autism spectrum disorder. In 23rd In-
ternational Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, pp. 571–582, 2018.
3
[24] C. Ionescu, D. Papava, V . Olaru, and C. Sminchisescu. Human3.6m:
Large scale datasets and predictive methods for 3d human sensing in
natural environments. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 36(7):1325–1339, jul 2014. 5
[25] Y . Jadoul, B. Thompson, and B. de Boer. Introducing Parselmouth: A
Python interface to Praat. Journal of Phonetics, 71:1–15, 2018. doi: 10.
1016/j.wocn.2018.07.001 5
[26] W. Jiang, S. Jin, W. Liu, C. Qian, P. Luo, and S. Liu. Posetrans: A simple
yet effective pose transformation augmentation for human pose estimation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.07755, 2022. 6
[27] K. Kirchhoff and S. Chen. Cmu pronouncing dictionary (cmudict).https:
//github.com/cmusphinx/cmudict, 2018. Accessed on: January 11,
2021. 5
[28] D. Kravvaris and K. L. Kermanidis. Speakers’ language characteristics
analysis of online educational videos. In IFIP International Conference on
Artificial Intelligence Applications and Innovations, pp. 60–69. Springer,
2014. 1, 2
[29] K. Kucher and A. Kerren. Text visualization techniques: Taxonomy,
visual survey, and community insights. In 2015 IEEE Pacific Visualization
Symposium (PacificVis), pp. 117–121, 2015. doi: 10.1109/PACIFICVIS.
2015.7156366 9
[30] H. Lam, E. Bertini, P. Isenberg, C. Plaisant, and S. Carpendale. Empirical
studies in information visualization: Seven scenarios. IEEE transactions
on visualization and computer graphics, 18(9):1520–1536, 2011. 7
[31] T.-Y . Lin, M. Maire, S. Belongie, J. Hays, P. Perona, D. Ramanan, P. Dollár,
and C. L. Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In
European conference on computer vision, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014. 5
[32] G. Luzardo, B. Guamán, K. Chiluiza, J. Castells, and X. Ochoa. Estimation
of presentations skills based on slides and audio features. In Proceedings
of the 2014 ACM Workshop on Multimodal Learning Analytics Workshop
and Grand Challenge, MLA ’14, p. 37–44. Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY , USA, 2014. doi: 10.1145/2666633.2666639
1, 2
[33] K. Maher, Z. Huang, J. Song, X. Deng, Y .-K. Lai, C. Ma, H. Wang, Y .-J.
Liu, and H. Wang. E-ffective: A visual analytic system for exploring the
emotion and effectiveness of inspirational speeches. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 28(1):508–517, Jan 2022. doi:
10.1109/TVCG.2021.3114789 1, 2, 3
[34] S. McLean. Business Communication for Success. Business Communica-
tion for Success. Flat World Knowledge, 2015. 3
[35] Microsoft. Azure cognitive speech to text service. https://
azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/cognitive-services/
speech-to-text/. Accessed March 4, 2022. 5
[36] A. Mollahosseini, B. Hasani, and M. H. Mahoor. Affectnet: A database
for facial expression, valence, and arousal computing in the wild. IEEE
Trans. Affect. Comput., 10(1):18–31, Jan. 2019. doi: 10.1109/TAFFC.
2017.2740923 5
[37] R. Niewiadomski, M. Mancini, and S. Piana. Human and virtual agent
expressive gesture quality analysis and synthesis. Coverbal Synchrony in
Human-Machine Interaction, pp. 269–292, 2013. 5
[38] B. Nojavanasghari, D. Gopinath, J. Koushik, T. Baltrušaitis, and L.-P.
Morency. Deep multimodal fusion for persuasiveness prediction. In
Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Multimodal
Interaction, ICMI ’16, p. 284–288. Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY , USA, 2016. doi: 10.1145/2993148.2993176 1, 2
[39] X. Ochoa, F. Domínguez, B. Guamán, R. Maya, G. Falcones, and
J. Castells. The rap system: Automatic feedback of oral presentation
10
© 2023 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/
skills using multimodal analysis and low-cost sensors. In Proceedings of
the 8th International Conference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge,
LAK ’18, p. 360–364. Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY , USA, 2018. doi: 10.1145/3170358.3170406 3
[40] O. Pakov and D. Miniotas. Visualization of eye gaze data using heat maps.
Elektronika Ir Elektrotechnika, 115(2), 2007. 3
[41] Pallets. Flask’s documentation (1.1.x). https://flask.
palletsprojects.com/en/1.1.x/. Accessed Januray 12, 2022.
4
[42] S. Plagenhoef, F. G. Evans, and T. Abdelnour. Anatomical data for analyz-
ing human motion. Research quarterly for exercise and sport, 54(2):169–
178, 1983. 5
[43] R. L. Potter. 9.5 presenting virtually. Technical Writing Essentials, 2022.
1
[44] J. Quoidbach, J. Gruber, M. Mikolajczak, A. Kogan, I. Kotsou, and M. I.
Norton. Emodiversity and the emotional ecosystem. Journal of experi-
mental psychology: General, 143(6):2057, 2014. 5
[45] V . Ramanarayanan, C. W. Leong, L. Chen, G. Feng, and D. Suendermann-
Oeft. Evaluating speech, face, emotion and body movement time-series
features for automated multimodal presentation scoring. In Proceedings
of the 2015 ACM on International Conference on Multimodal Interaction,
ICMI ’15, p. 23–30. Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY , USA, 2015. doi: 10.1145/2818346.2820765 1, 2
[46] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, and J. Sun. Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time
object detection with region proposal networks. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis & Machine Intelligence, 39(06):1137–1149, jun 2017.
doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2577031 5
[47] M. Rimol. Gartner says the majority of technology products and services
will be built by professionals outside of it by 2024, Jun 2021. 2
[48] P. Sanchez. Presenting Virtually: Communicate and Connect with Online
Audiences. Duarte Guide. DUARTE Press, 2021. 1, 4
[49] R. S. Schaefer, L. J. Beijer, W. Seuskens, T. C. Rietveld, and M. Sadakata.
Intuitive visualizations of pitch and loudness in speech. Psychonomic
bulletin & review, 23:548–555, 2016. 7
[50] J. Schneider, D. Börner, P. van Rosmalen, and M. Specht. Presentation
trainer: what experts and computers can tell about your nonverbal commu-
nication. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 33(2):164–177, 2017.
doi: 10.1111/jcal.12175 4
[51] R. Sharma, T. Guha, and G. Sharma. Multichannel attention network
for analyzing visual behavior in public speaking. In 2018 IEEE Winter
Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), pp. 476–484,
2018. doi: 10.1109/W ACV.2018.00058 1, 2
[52] B. Sievers, C. Lee, W. Haslett, and T. Wheatley. A multi-sensory
code for emotional arousal. Proceedings of the Royal Society B ,
286(1906):20190513, 2019. 6
[53] L. South, M. Schwab, N. Beauchamp, L. Wang, J. Wihbey, and M. A.
Borkin. Debatevis: Visualizing political debates for non-expert users. In
2020 IEEE Visualization Conference (VIS), pp. 241–245, 2020. doi: 10.
1109/VIS47514.2020.00055 2
[54] M. Stein, H. Janetzko, A. Lamprecht, T. Breitkreutz, P. Zimmermann,
B. Goldlücke, T. Schreck, G. Andrienko, M. Grossniklaus, and D. A. Keim.
Bring it to the pitch: Combining video and movement data to enhance
team sport analysis. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 24(1):13–22, 2018. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2017.2745181 3
[55] K. Sun, B. Xiao, D. Liu, and J. Wang. Deep high-resolution representation
learning for human pose estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5693–5703,
2019. 5
[56] M. I. Tanveer, J. Liu, and M. E. Hoque. Unsupervised extraction of human-
interpretable nonverbal behavioral cues in a public speaking scenario. In
Proceedings of the 23rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia,
MM ’15, p. 863–866. Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY , USA, 2015. doi: 10.1145/2733373.2806350 1, 2
[57] M. I. Tanveer, S. Samrose, R. A. Baten, and M. E. Hoque. Awe the
Audience: How the Narrative Trajectories Affect Audience Perception in
Public Speaking, p. 1–12. Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY , USA, 2018. 1, 2
[58] H.-N. Teodorescu and M. Hagan. Experimental, ad hoc, online, inter-
university student e-contest during the pandemic – lessons learned. In
2020 12th International Conference on Electronics, Computers and Artifi-
cial Intelligence (ECAI), pp. 1–6, 2020. doi: 10.1109/ECAI50035.2020.
9223243 3
[59] T. Tsai. Are you ted talk material? comparing prosody in professors and
ted speakers. In Sixteenth Annual Conference of the International Speech
Communication Association, 2015. 1, 2
[60] Z. Tu, Z. Huang, Y . Chen, D. Kang, L. Bao, B. Yang, and J. Yuan. Consis-
tent 3d hand reconstruction in video via self-supervised learning. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 45(8):9469–
9485, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2023.3247907 9
[61] X. Wang, Y . Ming, T. Wu, H. Zeng, Y . Wang, and H. Qu. Dehumor: Visual
analytics for decomposing humor. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, pp. 1–1, 2021. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2021.3097709 2,
3
[62] X. Wang, H. Zeng, Y . Wang, A. Wu, Z. Sun, X. Ma, and H. Qu. Voice-
Coach: Interactive Evidence-Based Training for Voice Modulation Skills
in Public Speaking, p. 1–12. Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY , USA, 2020. 2, 3
[63] E. Wood, T. Baltruaitis, X. Zhang, Y . Sugano, P. Robinson, and A. Bulling.
Rendering of eyes for eye-shape registration and gaze estimation. In
2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pp.
3756–3764, 2015. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2015.428 5
[64] T. Wörtwein, M. Chollet, B. Schauerte, L.-P. Morency, R. Stiefelhagen,
and S. Scherer. Multimodal public speaking performance assessment. In
Proceedings of the 2015 ACM on International Conference on Multimodal
Interaction, ICMI ’15, p. 43–50. Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY , USA, 2015. doi: 10.1145/2818346.2820762 1, 2
[65] A. Wu and H. Qu. Multimodal analysis of video collections: Visual
exploration of presentation techniques in ted talks. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 26(7):2429–2442, July 2020. doi:
10.1109/TVCG.2018.2889081 1, 2, 3
[66] L. Yuan, Y . Chen, S. Fu, A. Wu, and H. Qu. Speechlens: A visual analytics
approach for exploring speech strategies with textural and acoustic features.
In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Big Data and Smart Computing
(BigComp), pp. 1–8, Feb 2019. doi: 10.1109/BIGCOMP.2019.8679261 2
[67] H. Zeng, X. Shu, Y . Wang, Y . Wang, L. Zhang, T.-C. Pong, and H. Qu.
Emotioncues: Emotion-oriented visual summarization of classroom videos.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 27(7):3168–
3181, 2021. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2019.2963659 3
[68] H. Zeng, X. Wang, Y . Wang, A. Wu, T.-C. Pong, and H. Qu. Gesturelens:
Visual analysis of gestures in presentation videos. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 2022. 2, 3
[69] H. Zeng, X. Wang, A. Wu, Y . Wang, Q. Li, A. Endert, and H. Qu. Emoco:
Visual analysis of emotion coherence in presentation videos. IEEE Trans-
actions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , 26(1):927–937, Jan
2020. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2019.2934656 2, 3
[70] F. Z. Zhang, D. Campbell, and S. Gould. Efficient two-stage detection
of human-object interactions with a novel unary-pairwise transformer. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pp. 20104–20112, June 2022. 9
[71] J. R. Zhang. Upper body gestures in lecture videos: Indexing and cor-
relating to pedagogical significance. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM
International Conference on Multimedia, MM ’12, p. 1389–1392. Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY , USA, 2012. doi: 10.
1145/2393347.2396499 1, 2
11
© 2023 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/
SpeechMirror: A Multimodal Visual Analytics System for
Personalized Reflection of Online Public Speaking Effectiveness
(Supplemental Material)
1 D ETAILS OF THE DESIGN PROCESS
In this section, we will introduce the domain-centered interviews of
SpeechMirror in detail.
1.1 Details of participants in domain interview
The details of participants in domain interview are listed in Table 1.
Basic Information.All the experts are male while both amateurs
are female. The age ranges for both experts and amateurs are similar,
with both groups having participants in 18-50 years old. There is also
an expert in the 51-60 age range. Two expert participants speak English
as their native language, while other participants speak Chinese.
Educational Background.All amateur participants are with non-
STEM backgrounds, while expert participants have both STEM and
non-STEM backgrounds. Regarding the participants’ educational back-
ground, only two individuals possess relevant academic training. Specif-
ically, one participant has a background in mathematics (statistics) and
computer science, while the other has a background in psychology.
The remaining participants have educational backgrounds that are not
directly relevant to our study.
Public Speaking Experience.All experts had competed in over 5
contests, while both amateurs have competed in 2-5 times. For online
contests, one expert have competed for only once, one expert for 2-5
times and two experts for more than 5 times. The two amateurs have
participated in contests once and 2-5 times respectively. Among all
participants, one amateur participant has watched 1-10 speeches, while
one expert and one amateur participant have watched 11-50 speeches.
The remaining participants have watched more than 50 speeches. Ex-
perts have participants who have coached for 0-1 (1 participant) and 3-5
years (3 participants), while amateurs have no experience of training
others as an occupation.
1.2 Details of the process of domain interview
The interviews mainly focused on four topics in the form of questions:
Q1: What presentation techniques might be especially important
for online public speaking? How they affect the performance of public
speaking?
Q2: What presentation techniques are more critical than others in
online public speaking? Please list the top 8 techniques and explain
why.
Q3: How do you usually analyze and improve your speeches? How
do you learn from others’ speeches?
Q4: Is there something that is not easy to observe or easy to ignore
when watching speech videos?
Participant answers to Q1 and Q2 helped us to better understand the
scope of factors covered by our system, as well as the prioritization of
the factors in the system.
Manuscript received xx xxx. 201x; accepted xx xxx. 201x. Date of Publication
xx xxx. 201x; date of current version xx xxx. 201x. For information on
obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to: reprints@ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx
Fig. 1: The detail information of the data collection
Q1 was a verbal question, meant to find if there were factors not
considered by us in designing our system, and how the factor affects
speech performance.
For Q2 we provided 20 factors which the interviewer would rank
according to their view of the factors’ importance in speeches. Among
the top 4 factors were emotional diversity, eye gaze, emotional intensity,
and emotional coherence.
Q3 and Q4 helped to establish the analytical tasks the system is
meant to accomplish.
Live feedback for online speeches is particularly challenging, as
DA1 stated that “faces of the audience are not shown, and no audio
reply is allowed. You don’t know if the audience gets your points. . .
and can’t change without feedback.”
2 D ETAILS OF THE DATA COLLECTION
While collecting speech videos of over 100 online speech videos from
open access channels, we tried to keep a balance between quality and
quantity. More details of data statistical distribution are shown in
Figure 1.
3 D ETAILS OF FACTOR ANALYSIS RESULT
In ordinal regression, we perform logistic regression on the odds ratio
of each factor. The result of ordinal regression is shown in Table 2.
4 D ETAILS OF THE VISUAL DESIGN
4.1 Design alternatives
During the creation of SpeechMirror there were many design alterna-
tives that were created. We iterated our designs using earlier versions
of system to test potential designs.
4.1.1 Consistently used icons
Early on in the design we decided to provide users with more consis-
tently used icons in the system that would provide a more explanatory
overview of their speech. However, there remains uncertainty in the
complexity of the icons.
Our first attempt was to provide as comprehensive as possible view
to the user of the many factors considered by our system, as seen in
the past alternative design Figure 2 (B). A broader scope of factors
was considered, conceptually showing the change of factors (volatility)
1
arXiv:2309.05091v1  [cs.HC]  10 Sep 2023
Table 1: The information of participants in domain interview
Participant ID Gender Age STEM/Non-STEM Educational background Native
language
Contests
competed
Online contests
competed
Speeches
watched
Years of training
as occupation
DE1 Male 31 −40 Non-STEM None English over 5 over 5 over 50 3 −5
DE2 Male 51 −60 STEM Mathematics (Statistics)
Computer Science English over 5 1 over 50 3 −5
DE3 Male 41 −50 Non-STEM Psychology Chinese over 5 2-5 over 50 3 −5
DE4 Male 31 −40 STEM None Chinese over 5 over 5 11-50 0 −2
DA1 Female 18 −25 Non-STEM None Chinese 2-5 2-5 11-50 No
DA2 Female 26 −30 Non-STEM None Chinese 2-5 1 1-10 No
and spread (dispersion) of factors through arrows that suggest their
purpose. In theory this would allow users to have a common visual
language to more easily understand these concepts. However, the first
time we evaluated the system with this set of icons, users had much
confusion. The visual complexity of the icons, as well as the broader
scope of the factors used in our system seemed to create unnecessary
confusion. After this first unsatisfactory evaluation, we then decided to
simplify the visual language used in the system, using a smaller and
more memorable set of icons, as seen in Figure 2 (A).
4.1.2 SpeechTwin and the Mirror Panel
With the purpose of giving users a visual summary of the similarity
between their speech and other speeches as well as an understanding
of how crucial speaking techniques in their speech relate to other
speeches, we attempted several different visualizations. In the past work
E-ffective [?], the authors created a visualization called E-similarity
that sought to achieve a similar purpose “to compare the similarity
between speeches” as well as provide a visual summary of the speech’s
most crucial factors. E-similarity compared more similar speeches as
more close in distance on a two-dimensional map. Each speech was
represented as a point on the map, which used t-SNE [ ?] to reduce
dimensionality. Upon clicking a speech, a radar chart showing the
most crucial speaking techniques was displayed. One design alternative
we created was similar to E-similarity, but used color encoding and
icons used elsewhere in our system, which can be seen in Figure 3 (A).
Informal sessions to test the design of this visualization suggested that
it was difficult for the audience of our system to understand how the
map encodes similarity. This is similar to the result of the E-ffective
evaluation, where the users rated the ease of user of e-similarity poorly.
An alternative design provided a ranking of speeches according to
similarity, as shown in Figure 3 (B). The advantage of this design is
that it provided a more readily understandable list. The disadvantage
included that it poorly used the space, and the summary of crucial
factors was only observable by navigation. In our final design, we kept
the method of ranking by similarity in the mirror panel, but provided
information of crucial factors in the glyph provided, SpeechTwin.
Another design direction we considered was showing views of the
raw data over time in small multiple views, see Figure 3 (C). Inspiration
came from the work of Diezmann et al. [ ?]. An implementation of
their methods can be seen in in the work of Gremmler [?] that similarly
shows the volatility of motion across time. However, we found the
resulting visualizations difficult to achieve for all the factors our system
considered. Additionally, displaying each factor independently also
had the disadvantage of not allowing users to get a summary of the
most critical factors to compare.
For the creation of the visualization used in our final system,
SpeechTwin, we were inspired by the masks used in different cul-
tures to give a summary of the qualities of the speaker. In Chinese
operas, masks that reflect the mood and personality of the roles they are
performing are commonly used, see Figure 4 (A) for an example. In
Greek theater, the masks provide exaggerated summaries of the roles of
the speaker through changes such as the shape of the mouth and shape
of the facial muscles, see Figure 4 (B).
As illustrated in Figure 4 (C), alternative designs for SpeechTwin
included showing the proportion of emotions as Veronoi diagrams
contained in the boundaries of face, as well as speech bubbles that
illustrate qualities of the speaker’s voice.
4.2 Demonstration of data visualization
In this section, we provide more detailed visualization demos for
our proposed visualization methods: Effective curve (Figure 5), Fac-
tor Histogram (Figure 6), SpeechTwins of sentences (Figure 7) and
SpeechTwins of speeches (Figure 8).
4.3 Accessibility of data visualization
For red and green color blind people, the original colors we used to
identify emotional types proved problematic by color blindness simula-
tion. In order to provide access for individuals with color blindness, an
alternative color encoding method was created. Jonauskaite et al. [?]
evaluated the emotional associations of different colors for color blind
and non-color blind individuals. We referenced their work when de-
ciding on the colors associated with our revised color palette. We then
used an online color blindness simulator [?] developed with methods
by Machado et al. [?] in order to further differentiate the colors for the
more common red-green colorblind individuals. The resulting color
set, as well as the simulated colors can be seen in Figure 9. The vi-
sualizations in the alternative color encoding method are shown in
Figure 10.
5 D ETAILS OF THE EVALUATION STUDY
5.1 Details of participants
The details of the participants in our evaluation study are listed in
Table 3.
5.2 Appratus of the study
The study was conducted remotely, utilizing video conferencing soft-
ware to control the system interface. The participants were required to
keep their webcam on and the interface set to full screen throughout
the evaluation process.
5.3 Details of user task
The user tasks of participants in evaluation are listed in Table 4.
5.4 Details of user experience questionnaire
The questions and answers of participants in evaluation are listed in
Table 5.
5.5 Details of case study
The procedures of case study for expert user (EE1) and amateur user
(EA2) are shown in Figure 11.
5.5.1 Procedure of Case Study for Expert User (EE1)
As shown in Figure 11 (a), we introduce the detailed procedure of case
study for expert user (EE1) as follows:
1⃝EE1 noticed from the Factor Panel that the speaker he was coach-
ing had exceptionally low arousal.
2⃝EE1 then used the Time Slice Panel to view the detail of arousal.
3⃝EE1 then used the mirror panel to find one of the most different
SpeechTwins. EE1 clicked on the SpeechTwin to set the speech as
the comparison video. EE1 noted the speaker was the previous year’s
world 2nd place winner.
2
© 2023 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/
Table 2: The result of ordinal regression
Presentation Technique Feature Factor Significance w b0 b1 b2 b3 b4
Facial Expression
Type Diversity p = 0.002∗ -2.028 0.318 1.262 2.361 3.207 4.87
Valence V olatility p = 0.571 -0.017 -2.626 -1.751 -0.709 0.103 1.721
Average p = 0.005∗ 3.698 -2.249 -1.322 -0.238 0.581 2.257
Arousal V olatility p = 0.761 -0.009 -2.41 -1.534 -0.496 0.31 1.926
Average p = 0.000∗ 12.71 -1.311 -0.343 0.846 1.786 3.559
Eye Contact Gaze Direction V olatility p = 0.002∗ -597.981 -4.139 -3.162 -2.012 -1.187 0.431
Dispersion p = 0.067 5.245 -1.082 -0.189 0.87 1.686 3.313
Watching Camera Ratio p = 0.265 1.536 -1.923 -1.03 0.014 0.814 2.429
Use of Stage
Distance from Camera V olatility p = 0.908 0.001 -2.095 -1.216 -0.18 0.624 2.238
Dispersion p = 0.185 1.444 -1.903 -1.021 0.023 0.837 2.476
Position in Frame V olatility p = 0.026∗ -210.54 -2.957 -2.044 -0.963 -0.144 1.493
Dispersion p = 0.141 0.006 -1.59 -0.71 0.332 1.146 2.787
Body Gesture Gesture Energy V olatility p = 0.860 0.005 -1.962 -1.082 -0.045 0.757 2.371
Average p = 0.426 4.28E-07 -2.041 -1.164 -0.128 0.68 2.306
Gesture Diversity Diversity p = 0.266 191.157 -1.833 -0.945 0.099 0.907 2.527
V oice
V olume V olatility p = 0.000∗ -0.17 -8.904 -7.547 -6.055 -5.13 -3.444
Average p = 0.413 -0.048 -4.954 -4.071 -3.035 -2.233 -0.612
Pitch V olatility p = 0.438 -0.012 -3.088 -2.207 -1.165 -0.359 1.257
Average p = 0.988 0.000071 -2.103 -1.224 -0.187 0.616 2.229
Pace
Speaking Rate V olatility p = 0.617 0.023 -1.254 -0.37 0.668 1.47 3.084
Average p = 0.198 0.007 -0.286 0.607 1.668 2.473 4.076
Pauses V olatility p = 0.157 0.065 0.492 1.39 2.44 3.248 4.872
Average p = 0.533 -0.002 -2.416 -1.53 -0.489 -0.314 1.927
Content Script - - - - - - - -
4⃝EE1 used the timeline to find a moment of especially high arousal.
After noticing the changes in arousal over time, EE1 said “I think the
tool could be very useful. In order to build a connection to the audience,
you need contrast, you need the twists and turns of emotions. Then you
can elicit emotions of the audience. I can use this to show my student
that there is strong contrast [for this expert speaker]. I could let the
student see where they are and compare with different speakers.”
5⃝While EE1’s mouse was hovering on a SpeechTwin with a smooth
spread of positional footprints, EE1 added, “With the SpeechTwin we
can see where they are and compare with the other speakers to see
possibilities.”
6⃝ EE1 then moved his mouse to indicate a SpeechTwin with a
smooth distribution of footprints and commented “ this speaker had
constant stage movement.” EE1 then pointed at a SpeechTwin with a
clear 3 part distribution of footprints, stating “if like this there is a clear
stage design”. EE1 noted the possible use of our system for coaching,
“Overall I feel like this is a tool that I could use and discuss with my
students and find out different insights so that they can improve.”
5.5.2 Procedure of Case Study for Amateur User (EA2)
As shown in Figure 11 (b), we introduce the detailed procedure of case
study for amateur user (EA2) as follows:
1⃝ EA2 first noted that while overall, the average valence in her
face was indicated by the system as performing well, the system found
her speech most similar to someone that was smiling throughout their
speech. EA2 guessed it might be that her sadness wasn’t expressed
obviously enough.
2⃝ When looking at the Time Slice panel, EA2 observed that the
ending of the speech was happy, “This is correct.” However, EA2 then
pointed to earlier time slices in her speech “For these two parts I really
wanted to show my sadness, my anger, but I guess I failed.”
3⃝ While comparing by selecting both the valence average and
gesture energy change, EA2 stated “ I want to see who is the most
similar to me.”
4⃝ EA2 selected the most similar speech, noting that the gestures,
similar to hers, were mostly below the screen or on the screen border.
5⃝ EA2 then looked at the Mirror Panel to find the most different
speaker. Playing the video, EA2 saw a speaker that had many different
gestures and stage changes. While looking at the speech comparison
board to compare to her speech across factors, EA2 noted “ Ahhh...
much more pose diversity than me.”
3
Fig. 2: Design alternatives of the consistently used icons.
Fig. 3: Design alternatives of SpeechTwin and the Mirror Panel.
4
© 2023 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/
Fig. 4: Design inspirations and alternatives of SpeechTwin. (A) A mask in Chinese opera, refer [?]. (B) A mask in Greece opera, refer [?]. (C) A
design alternative of SpeechTwin.
Table 3: The information of participants in evaluation
Participant ID Gender Age STEM/Non-STEM Educational backgrond Native
language
Contests
competed
Online contests
competed
Speeches
watched
Years of training
as occupation
EE1 Male 26-30 STEM None Chinese over 5 2-5 over 50 over 5
EE2 Female 31-40 STEM
Psychology
Mathematics (Statistics)
Computer Science
Chinese over 5 2-5 over 50 3-5
EE3 Female 31-40 Non-STEM None Chinese over 5 2-5 over 50 over 5
EE4 Male 41-50 STEM Mathematics (Statistics)
Computer Science Other over 5 over 5 over 50 3-5
EA1 Female 31-40 Non-STEM None Chinese 2-5 2-5 11-50 No
EA2 Female 31-40 Non-STEM None Chinese over 5 2-5 over 50 No
EA3 Male 51-60 Non-STEM Design Chinese over 5 over 5 11-50 No
EA4 Female 31-40 STEM Computer Science Chinese 2-5 2-5 11-50 No
5
Fig. 5: Effective curve.
Table 4: The details of user task in evaluation
ID User Task Corresponding Design Considerations
UT1 Find a factor our system thinks might improved in the speech. DC1
UT2 Evaluate how the speech factor is used in the world final and semi-final speeches. DC1
UT3 Try to understand the effectiveness distribution of the factor. DC1
UT4 Click to select the factor to focus on the use of the technique in the speech. DC3, DC4
UT5 Play the speech and watch the delivery of the factor. DC4
UT6 In the video feed try to hover on the part of speaker in you are interested in. DC4
UT7 Find a potentially ineffective moment in the speech and select it. DC3, DC4
UT8 Observe how the factor is used in the content of the speech. DC4
UT9 Observe the speech twin for the original speech. DC5
UT10 Look for a speech that has very similar or different use of this factor than you. DC2, DC5
UT11 Find a moment in the compared speech where the factor is used similarly or differently. DC4, DC5
UT12 Try to find a place in the original speech which might be improved. DC1-DC5
6
© 2023 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/
Fig. 6: Factor Histogram.
Table 5: The questions and answers of participants in evaluation
Questions EE1 EE2 EE3 EE4 EA1 EA2 EA3 EA4
Did you find the system brought awareness to the overall use of factors in the analyzed speech? 6 5 6 7 5 5 7 7
Were you able to observe new ways of speech delivery in speeches? 7 5 5 6 5 6 6 5
Did you find the system recommended factor for improvement useful? 7 4 6 6 5 5 7 7
Did you find the system recommended factor for improvement easy to use? 6 4 4 4 4 4 6 5
Was comparing a technique in the analyzed speech to the speeches in our collection useful? 7 6 4 7 4 6 7 7
Was comparing a technique in the analyzed speech to the speeches in our collection easy to use? 6 4 5 4 4 5 7 6
Was it useful to find speeches that had very similar or different use of techniques than the analyzed speech? 7 5 4 7 5 6 7 7
Was it easy to find speeches that had very similar or different use of techniques than the analyzed speech? 7 5 6 4 6 6 7 7
Was it useful to find speeches that had very similar or different speech content than the analyzed speech? 6 6 5 7 4 6 7 6
Was it easy to find speeches that had very similar or different speech content than the analyzed speech? 7 3 3 4 4 6 6 4
Was it useful to observe the use of body language directly in the video feed? 7 5 6 7 3 6 7 5
Was it easy to observe the use of body language directly in the video feed? 7 6 5 5 4 6 6 7
Was it useful to find places in your speech to improve? 7 5 5 7 4 6 7 7
Was it easy to find places in your speech to improve? 7 4 5 4 4 6 7 4
Was it useful to use the script integrated with effectiveness data? 6 5 5 7 4 7 7 7
Was it easy to use the script integrated with effectiveness data? 7 5 4 6 5 5 7 7
Was it useful to understand how speech techniques change over time? 7 5 6 6 5 6 7 7
Was it easy to understand how speech techniques change over time? 7 5 6 3 5 5 7 7
Was it useful to summarize a speech with the methods given in our system? 7 6 5 7 6 7 7 7
Was it easy to understand the summary of a speech with the methods given in our system? 7 6 5 4 6 5 7 6
7
Fig. 7: SpeechTwins of sentences.
8
© 2023 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/
Fig. 8: SpeechTwins of speeches.
9
Fig. 9: Alternative color encoding palette and color blindness simulation result.
Fig. 10: Demonstrations of visualizations with the alternative color encoding palette. (A) SpeechTwin. (B) Emotional Diversity visualization.
10
© 2023 IEEE. This is the author’s version of the article that has been published in IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. The final version of this record is available at: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/
11
2
3
4
5
6
(a) Pr ocedur e of Case Study f or Exper t User (EE1)
(b ) Pr ocedur e of Case Study f or Amat eur User (EA2)
11
2
3
4
5
Fig. 11: Procedure of Case Study.
11