A Multi-Task, Multi-Modal Approach for Predicting Categorical
and Dimensional Emotions
Alex-Răzvan Ispas∗
LISN-CNRS, Paris-Saclay University
Saclay, France
alex-razvan.ispas@universite-paris-
saclay.fr
Théo Deschamps-Berger
LISN-CNRS, Paris-Saclay University
Saclay, France
theo.deschamps-
berger@lisn.upsaclay.fr
Laurence Devillers
LISN-CNRS, Sorbonne University
Paris, France
devil@lisn.upsaclay.fr
Figure 1: Overview of the proposed multi-task, cross-attention speech emotion recognition architecture. The acoustic and
linguistic features are extracted with the help of HuBERT [ 13] and DeBERTaV3 [12]. Afterwards the features are refined by two
self-attention modules. Then, inspired by [ 8] and [ 21], we slightly modify the original modality interaction and introduce two
multihead cross-attention layers which integrate the learnable bridge tokens that create the connection between the features
of the two modalities. The model predicts the categorical emotion label, the valence, and the arousal score for each segment.
Besides the cosine decaying procedure, the random modality masking is performed according to the original implementation.
ABSTRACT
Speech emotion recognition (SER) has received a great deal of at-
tention in recent years in the context of spontaneous conversations.
While there have been notable results on datasets like the well-
known corpus of naturalistic dyadic conversations, IEMOCAP, for
both the case of categorical and dimensional emotions, there are few
papers which try to predict both paradigms at the same time. There-
fore, in this work, we aim to highlight the performance contribution
of multi-task learning by proposing a multi-task, multi-modal sys-
tem that predicts categorical and dimensional emotions. The results
emphasise the importance of cross-regularisation between the two
∗Upon reviewing the fully released version of [20], it came to our attention that the
proceedings version of this work did not include the speaker-independent results
for [22]. Therefore, we include in brackets the speaker-independent results for a fair
comparison with our model. Additionally, we were unable to ascertain any details
regarding speaker-independence in [ 5], and therefore advise that these results be
interpreted with caution.
types of emotions. Our approach consists of a multi-task, multi-
modal architecture that uses parallel feature refinement through
self-attention for the feature of each modality. In order to fuse the
features, our model introduces a set of learnable bridge tokens that
merge the acoustic and linguistic features with the help of cross-
attention. Our experiments for categorical emotions on 10-fold
validation yield results comparable to the current state-of-the-art.
In our configuration, our multi-task approach provides better re-
sults compared to learning each paradigm separately. On top of
that, our best performing model achieves a high result for valence
compared to the previous multi-task experiments.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Computing methodologies → Speech recognition; Speech
recognition.
arXiv:2401.00536v1  [cs.CL]  31 Dec 2023

Ispas et al.
1 INTRODUCTION
The capacity to automatically estimate human users’ emotions
during conversations is crucial for adaptive intelligent technology.
Speech is one of the most important means of communication
among human beings. The paralinguistic information conveyed
through speech is used to identify people’s emotional states. There
are two major paradigms of emotion which are referenced in the
current work for affective computing. The first is the categorical
representation paradigm promoted by figures like Plutchick or Eck-
man [9] who classify the emotions into groups of primary emotions
(e.g surprise, anger, happiness, sadness, fear and disgust). The second
is a continuous dimension paradigm proposed by Russel [15] which
tries to quantify emotions based on three continuous dimensions:
valence, arousal and dominance.
The IEMOCAP [4] dataset presents a compelling multi-modal
approach to emotion analysis, combining audio and video record-
ings of naturalistic dyadic conversations. With diverse emotion
labels representing categorical and dimensional paradigms, it offers
a rich landscape for exploring and understanding human emotional
expressions. Speech corpora like IEMOCAP are valuable resources
which open possibilities for exploring the complex relationship
between behavioral signals and emotional understanding in natural
language processing and affective computing.
While there have been successful papers which provided re-
markable results for categorical emotions [1, 5, 8, 21], as well as for
dimensional emotions [16, 18], there are few works that have tried
to use both paradigms at the same time. For example, [ 16] tried
to predict the categorical emotions by mapping the dimensional
dimensions, meanwhile in a recent work [17], the categorical and
dimensional emotions are unified through a hierarchical multi-task
model obtaining notable results for the arousal dimension. However,
there are examples where multi-task learning proved to slightly
improve the performance of other speech tasks [11].
Multi-task learning holds promise for speech emotion recogni-
tion due to its capacity to leverage shared information between
related tasks. By simultaneously optimising the model for both cate-
gorical emotion labels and continuous dimensional representations,
multi-task learning enables the extraction of a more holistic and nu-
anced understanding of emotions. Therefore, in this paper, our aim
is to demonstrate the performance contribution of multi-task learn-
ing by predicting the categorical and dimensional emotions through
both acoustic and linguistic information. Considering the recent suc-
cess of cross-attention between the features of the self-supervised
pre-trained models of the textual and audio representations [8, 21],
we utilise a similar approach and obtain better performance on
dimensional representations. We propose a multi-task architecture
that predicts the categorical and the dimensional emotions at the
same time, but independently. As we want to give equal importance
to the acoustic and linguistic features, we adopt a similar strategy
emphasised by [21] which introduces a set of learnable query to-
kens which are meant to collect the emotional information from the
concatenated features of the audio and textual modality. Unlike the
original approach, the tokens will play the role of a bridge that will
fuse the acoustic and linguistic features together. At the same time,
we experiment with the Random Modality Masking (RMM) which
masks either the audio or the text embeddings during the training
in order to constrain the model to learn in depth the features of
each modality.
Our experiments demonstrate the efficiency of cross-regularisation
through categorical and dimensional multi-task learning by compar-
ing our results with the experiments where we optimize for a single
task. In addition, our best performing model achieves remarkable
results for the valence dimension.
2 RELATED WORK
In the case of IEMOCAP [4], there has been a lack of agreement
regarding the number of folds as well as the number of emotional
segments, making the reproducibility of the results a challenging
task. Therefore, [2] made a review of the current IEMOCAP papers,
that provided open-source implementations, in order to check their
reproducibility. They also provided a set of recommendations and
evaluation guidelines in which they state that a minimally compa-
rable baseline should use the neutral, sad, angry and happy+excited
classes, resulting into a total number of 5531 samples. They also
recommend the use of 10-fold cross-validation where 8 speakers are
used for training, 1 speaker for validation and 1 for test. Once these
results are reported, the researches can modify the experiments as
desired.
In the context of categorical emotions, the current state-of-the-
art is dominated by transformer based architectures. In the case
of IEMOCAP [4], fine-tuning approaches on HuBERT-large [13]
and wav2vec2-large [3] prove to be the most efficient uni-modal
methods for categorical emotions [22]. Other approaches try to use
complementary tasks, such as speech recognition in order to cross-
regularize the models [5]. In multi-modal systems, cross-attention
mechanisms can provide an increase of performance of 4% [8] for
other categorical emotion corpora such as CEMO, an emercency call
center corpus [7]. In [21], they introduce random modality masking
to mitigate the issue of bias modality by maximazing the emotional
information provided by both the audio and text transformer. They
also introduce a group of learnable tokens in the cross-attention
layer such that they can fuse the emotional features which come
from the acoustic and linguistic modalities.
In the case of dimensional emotions, pre-trained transformer-
based architectures show better performance for valence on speech
corpora, making them more robust for small perturbations and
group fairness for the two genders [ 20].[18] proposed a Teacher-
Student training approach on multi-modal audio and text represen-
tations in which they achieved state-of-the-art results for dimen-
sional values.
Although there have been successful experiments that used
speech-to-text in a multi-task set up to enhance the performance of
categorical emotions [5, 22], there are few papers which considered
to combine the categorical and dimensional emotions. In a recent
paper, both the categorical and dimensional emotions were used
in a hierarchical multi-task approach [17]. Although the result for
valence was higher, it had a slightly lower score for arousal com-
pared to [18]. [6] explored the prediction of multiple emotions by
using multi-task learning together with every available modality
(acoustic, visual and textual) in a temporal LSTM-RNN model. In

A Multi-Task, Multi-Modal Approach for Predicting Categorical and Dimensional Emotions
another study, the arousal and valence were leveraged to assign sup-
plementary information within a Deep Belief Network framework
for the categorical task [23].
In the context of our current work, we are going to respect the
guidelines provided by [2] and compare against the other models
that use the same setup. At the same time, we will follow [20] and
use the weighted average recall (WAR) as the categorical metric
since IEMOCAP is an imbalanced dataset. In the case of dimen-
sional emotions, the metric will be the Concordance Correlation
Coefficient (CCC). Our work tries to explore the possibility of per-
formance enhancement in SER multi-modal frameworks by using
both the categorical and dimensional emotions in a multi-task man-
ner. Regarding the transformers, this work will use HuBERT-large
and DeBERTaV3-large [12]. We experimented with different com-
binations of the dual cross-attention emphasised in [8], the random
modality masking (RMM) and the learnable query tokens from [21].
Our best performing model achieves a CCC score of .748 for valence.
3 METHODOLOGY
Given the audio segment and the textual transcript of someone’s
speech, our model is predicting the categorical emotion label, the
valence and the arousal. The two transformers used to extract
the acoustic and linguistic features are HuBERT-large [ 13] and
DeBERTaV3-large [12]. HuBERT-large training implies self-supervised
learning in which the targets are created based on predicting clus-
ters in which each feature vector is assigned, meanwhile DeBERTaV3-
large relies on disentangled attention in order to capture depen-
dencies between the words in the sentence. Figure 1 presents the
overview of the proposed architecture. Section 3.1 introduces the
multi-task loss as well as its sub-components. In Section 3.2 we
present the feature refinement as well as how we handled the se-
quence length issue between the audio and text embeddings. Then
Section 3.3 presents how the emotional features of the acoustic and
linguistic embeddings are learned by implementing a set of learn-
able bridge tokens. Section 3.4 presents the way the complementary
features are fused with the help of multi-head attention and the
learnable bridge tokens. Finally, Section 3.5 presents the Random
Modality Masking (RMM) and the masking chance decaying proce-
dure chosen alongside the training.
3.1 Multi-task Learning
Our multi-task problem can be formalised as a prediction of a set
consisting of valence, arousal, and the categorical emotions which
can take values from the set D = {𝑛𝑒𝑢𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑙, ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑝𝑦, 𝑠𝑎𝑑, 𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑟𝑦 }.
Given a set of features {𝑢𝑖, 𝑡𝑖 }𝐼
𝑖=1, where 𝑖 ∈ { 1, . . . , 𝐼} represents
the i-th utterance of the speech 𝑢𝑖 and the i-th transcript 𝑡𝑖, predict
the target 𝑦𝑖 = [𝑦𝑖
𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑐 , 𝑦𝑖
𝑉 , 𝑦𝑖
𝐴], where 𝑦𝑖 represents the ground
truth.
The categorical labels will be optimised using the categorical
cross-entropy (CE), which for a given dataset 𝐼 is computed as:
𝐶𝐸 =
𝐼∑︁
𝑖=1
𝐷∑︁
𝑐=1
𝑦𝑖,𝑑 log( ˆ𝑦𝑖,𝑑 )
In the case of dimensional emotions, the standard loss function is
the inverse of the Concordance Correlation Coefficient (CCC). That
is because the CCC score needs to be maximised, meanwhile the
loss needs to be minimised. Given the vector of predictions ˆ𝑦 ∈ R 𝐼 ,
and the ground truth 𝑦 ∈ R 𝐼 , the CCC loss for one dimensional
value can be calculated as:
L𝐶𝐶𝐶 = 1 − 2𝐶𝑜𝑣 ( ˆ𝑦, 𝑦)
𝜎2
ˆ𝑦 + 𝜎2𝑦 + ( 𝜇 ˆ𝑦 − 𝜇𝑦)
Following the example of [11, 17], we define our multi-task loss
as the weighted sum of the categorical cross-entropy, the CCC loss
for valence and the CCC loss for arousal, as shown in Equation 3:
(
L𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 = ℎ1 ∗ 𝐶𝐸 + ℎ2 ∗ L𝑉
𝐶𝐶𝐶 + ℎ3 ∗ L𝐴
𝐶𝐶𝐶Í3
𝑖=1 ℎ𝑖 = 1
where ℎ1, ℎ2, ℎ3 represent the hyperparameters that control the
contribution of each criterion in the learning process.
3.2 Uni-modal Refinement
Before performing cross-attention, we refine the encoded features
with the help of the self-attention modules in order to emphasise
the emotional frames for each modality. In our architecture, each
self-attention module consists of 32 attention heads, which is the
same amount of heads utilised for the large models in [ 8]. Both
HuBERT-large and DeBERTaV3-large have the same hidden dimen-
sion of 1024. In order to have the same representation regarding
the sequence length, the shorter sequence is padded to the dimen-
sion of the longer one. The final representation of the audio and
text features are 𝑎1:𝑁 ∈ R𝑁 𝑥𝑑𝑒 and 𝑡1:𝑁 ∈ R𝑁 𝑥𝑑𝑒 where 𝑁 is the
maximum sequence length and 𝑑𝑒 is the hidden dimension size.
3.3 Modality Interaction
Following the example of [21], we create two groups of trainable
tokens which aggregate the embedding features of 𝑎
′
1:𝑁 and 𝑤
′
1:𝑁
by the attention mechanisms. Unlike the classic cross-attention,
where the key and the value come from the same modality and the
query comes from a different modality, our approach uses different
modalities for the key and value and it tries to merge them together
by implying a set of learnable bridge tokens. The trainable tokens
𝑄𝑎 ∈ R𝐿𝑥𝑑𝑒 and 𝑄𝑡 ∈ R𝐿𝑥𝑑𝑒 play the role of the query. Tensor
𝑄𝑎 represents the learnable query tokens (Q) of the multihead at-
tention layer that uses the audio embeddings as key (K) and the
text embeddings as value (V), meanwhile 𝑄𝑡 is the query for the
layer where the text embeddings are the key and the audio embed-
dings are the value. The learnable bridge tokens can be perceived as
the intermediary that provides a mean of interaction between the
acoustic and linguistic features. Dimenson 𝐿 represents the number
of learnable tokens. We perform cross-attention in both scenarios
because it is possible that the attention weights computed with the
help of either the audio or the text embeddings can offer more or
less insight regarding the optimal weights for fusing the features
together.
Once the cross-attention is performed, each tensor will contain
L tokens that are average pooled over the tokens dimension. Af-
terwards, the two vectors will be stacked and average pooled once
again in order to get the mean emotional features from the two

Ispas et al.
multi-heads. Finally, the mean vector will be fed into both the clas-
sifier and the regressor in order to predict the categorical emotion
label,the valence and the arousal. The architecture of the classifier
and the regressor can be seen in Figure 2.
Figure 2: The head consists of a classifier and a regressor. The
regressor has two sigmoid neurons which predict the valence
and the arousal.
3.4 Fusing the results of the multi-head
cross-attention layers
As explained by [8], the main intuition behind attention is to weight
each matrix input with respect to its importance given by the con-
text. Cross-attention implies combining embeddings of the same
dimension which come from different modalities. In the context of
our architecture, instead of using a query (Q) and a key (K) from
two different modalities, the queries will be learnable tensors and
the key and value will come from the two modalities.
𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝑆 = (𝑄, 𝐾, 𝑉 )) = 𝑠𝑜 𝑓 𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 ( 𝑄𝐾 𝑇
√︁
𝑑𝑘
)𝑉
where 𝑆 ∈ {( 𝑄𝑎, 𝐾𝑎, 𝑉𝑡 ), (𝑄𝑡 , 𝐾𝑡 , 𝑉𝑎)}
In the case when we perform cross-attention without the learn-
able bridge tokens, we follow the norm and we choose the key
and the value to come from one modality and the query from the
opposite modality.
As shown in Figure 1, we followed [8] and [19] and we imple-
mented two multi-head attention layers such that we could apply
attention mechanisms on multiple subspaces.
𝑀𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑 (𝑄, 𝐾, 𝑉 ) = 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑎𝑡 (ℎ1, . . . , ℎ𝑛)𝑊 𝑂
where ℎ𝑖 = 𝐴𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝑄𝑊 𝑄
𝑖 , 𝐾𝑊 𝐾
𝑖 , 𝑉𝑊 𝑉
𝑖 )
Once the emotional features 𝑒𝑎 and 𝑒𝑡 are obtained from the
multi-head cross-attention layers, the stacked mean feature embed-
dings 𝑒𝑠 are computed as following:
𝑒𝑠 = 𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛 (𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 (𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛 (𝑒𝑎), 𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛 (𝑒𝑡 )))
3.5 Random Modality Masking
As stated in [21], the main purpose of random modality masking
(RMM) is to mitigate the situations where only the features of a
single transformer are used to detect the emotions. The strategy of
RMM is to encourage the model to focus on the uni-modal features,
in the early stages, by randomly masking either the text or the
audio embeddings. In the later stages, the model will focus more on
the complementary features of the multi-modal system. In order
to not alter the weights of the masked modality, when the model
applies RMM we freeze the layers of the respective modality.
Like in the original work, we set a hyperparameter p which
dictates if the respective epoch has one modality masked or not.
The training starts with p set to 0.8 and it decays in a cosine manner
alongside the training, as shown in Figure 3. If the probability goes
below the threshold of 0.1, it is set automatically to 0. The original
paper emphasised that the model is inclined to detect the emotions
by relying on the features of the text transformer. Therefore, we
set the RMM to be more prone to mask the textual modality. The
probability of masking the text embeddings is 0.6, meanwhile the
one for audio is 0.4.
Figure 3: Masking chance cosine decay alongside the training
of a fold. When the masking chance gets below 0.1, it is set
by default to 0
4 EXPERIMENT DESIGN
4.1 Dataset
The IEMOCAP dataset contains 12 hours of recorded audiovisual
data, featuring five spontaneous conversational sessions between
a unique male and female speaker. There are 10 speakers in total
alongside 5 different sessions. Three annotators labeled each seg-
ment with categorical emotions (e.g., happy, angry, sad etc.) and
provided dimensional values for the valence, arousal, and domi-
nance dimensions. The conversations are divided into scripted and
improvised sections.

A Multi-Task, Multi-Modal Approach for Predicting Categorical and Dimensional Emotions
4.2 Experimental Set Up
The experiments were performed based on the guidelines empha-
sised by [ 2]: we used only the neutral, sad, angry and happy +
surprised labels, resulting into a total of 5531 utterances. The num-
ber of utterances for each emotion are: 1708 for neutral, 1139 for
angry, 1084 for sad and 1646 for happy. In the case of dimensional
emotions, we rescaled the scores from 0 to 5, into 0 to 1. At the same
time, all experiments were conducted using the 10-fold validation.
Our experimental results are displayed in Table 2. While train-
ing, we use the multi-task loss presented in Section 3.1 with all
hyperparameters set to 0.33 for an equal contribution. During the
initial phases of our experimentation, adjustments to hyperparam-
eters were explored, such as assigning values of 0.5 to categorical
emotions and 0.25 to each dimensional variable. However, this led
to a slight reduction in the performance of all tasks. Consequently,
we decided to maintain the balanced weight configuration. We used
the Adam [14] optimiser, with a learning rate of 3−5 and a batch
size of 16. To prevent gradient explosion in the two larger models,
we implemented gradient norm clipping, setting the threshold to 1.
In the experiments with learnable bridge tokens, we set the number
of tokens to 30 as it was the optimal number of tokens reported
in [21]. Each multi-head attention layer had a total of 32 heads.
The embedding layers, as well as the feature extractor layers, were
frozen in both modalities. Each fold was trained for 20 epochs.
Table 1: Comparing Results for categorical Emotions. All
experiments were conducted on 10-fold. M-T means that
the respective experiment used multi-task, W AR stands for
Weighted A verage Recall
Publication Acoustic Features M-T WAR
Feng et al. [10] MFCCs 68.63%
Aftab et al. [1] MFCCs 70.23%
Zou et al. [24] MFCCs, Spec, wav2vec2 71.64%
Wang et.al [22] HuBERT-large 79.6% (73.0)
Wang et.al [22] wav2vec2-large 77.5% (71.0)
Cai et. al [5] wav2vec2-large ✓ 78.15%
5 RESULTS
5.1 Comparing Results
We compare our results against the other reported experiments
that used 10-fold. The previous categorical results can be seen in
Table 1. We gathered the same results reported by [20] and [2]. All
experiments that were conducted with multi-task learning utilised
speech-to-text as a secondary task. We chose the WAR metric as
the primary one for categorical emotions because the dataset is
imbalanced as shown in Section 4.2. Therefore, we want to take
into account the class frequencies and assign higher importance to
the recall of the minority classes. Like that, we prevent the model
from being biased towards the majority label and ensure that the
performance on all four labels are considered.
In Table 1, the last results are obtained by using multi-task. The
multi-task loss of [5] implies the categorical cross-entropy (CE) and
the Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) loss. In the case
of the best performing model [22], they perform partial fine-tuning
on a HuBERT-large model whose output is average time pooled and
fed into a linear classifier. The average time pooling is compressing
the variance of the time lengths by aggregating the hidden states
of the model over time.
To the best of our knowledge and considering the fact that the
guidelines suggested by [2] are recent, we could not find dimen-
sional experiments that used 10-fold on IEMOCAP. Therefore, Table
3 contains the best performing results for dimensional emotions
on 5-fold. [17] combined the CE together with the CCC loss of the
valence, arousal and dominance.
5.2 Our Results
Table 2 displays the results of our experiments. We chose to also
display the Unweighted Average Recall (UAR) in order to empha-
sise the difference in performance when we do not take the sample
frequency into account. If we compare the single-task and multi-
task experiments from Table 2, every experiment that uses both
the categorical and dimensional emotions improves the CCC score
of the valence. In this configuration, this result suggests that the
prediction of the categorical emotions can cross-regularize the pre-
diction of valence. This statement is also supported by the fact that
the model underperforms when it is trained only for the dimen-
sional task. Overall, in the best performing models, the multi-task
improves the score of valence by 2-3%. In the case of arousal, it
was noticed that in the early epochs it was performing much better
than the valence. However, in the middle stages of the training, the
arousal is surpassed by the valence in almost every experiment.
This behaviour could be caused by the fact that the weights of
the regressor cannot be used to predict both values at the same
time. The performance of the categorical emotions also benefits
from multi-task learning, increasing the performance of the WAR
by 1-2% compared to the single task configuration. However, the
best performing model for WAR (74.6%) has a slightly lower perfor-
mance compared to the other categorical experiments such as [22]
and [5]. This result could imply that the CTC loss used by [5] is a
more optimal complementary task in contrast with the regression
of the dimensional emotions. In the case of [22], unlike the standard
average pooling, the average time pooling layer is considering the
entire temporal dimension and it computes the average across all
time steps, which seems like a more consistent method for infer-
ring the information of the acoustic features. Overall, the multi-task
learning increased the performance of every experiment, no matter
the complexity of the architecture.
By looking to the components of the architecture, it could be
noticed that the self-attention layers play a major role in the per-
formance, in spite of the number of optimised tasks. Our multi-task
model which uses only self-attention increases the WAR of our
HuBERT-large + DeBERTaV3-large baseline by almost 6% and the
CCC score of the valence by 10%. The improvement is caused by the
effectiveness of the emotional frames emphasised from each modal-
ity. Together with cross-attention, the model can reach a valence
score of .738. When the learnable bridge tokens are included, the
model reaches the highest score for the CCC of the valence (.748)
and the second best score for the WAR (74.6%), which suggests that

Ispas et al.
Table 2: Experimental results on the proposed architecture. The experiments where multi-task learning was performed have
both the Disc and Con columns check-marked. The table specifies the components that were used in each experiment. S/A
signifies that the model used self-attention, meanwhile CR/A means that the model used cross-attention layers. Q specifies
if the architecture learned bridge tokens and the RMM marks that the model is applying random modality masking during
training. The metrics for categorical emotions are the Unweighted A verage Recall(UAR) and the Weighted A verage Recall(W AR).
V and A represent the Concordance Correlation Coefficient (CCC) of the Valence and Arousal. Every experiment which implied
multi-task learning was conducted on three different seeds and it displays the mean and the standard deviation.
Model S/A CR/A Q RMM Disc Con UAR WAR V A
HuBERT-large + RoBERTa-large ✓ ✓ 68.3 ± 0.20% 66.31 ± 0.34% .638 ± .01 .673 ± .03
HuBERT-large + RoBERTa-large ✓ 66.18% 65% - -
HuBERT-large + RoBERTa-large ✓ - - .620 .674
HuBERT-large + DeBERTav3-large ✓ ✓ 69.43 ± 0.64% 67.22 ± 0.74% .637 ± .43 .674 ± .12
HuBERT-large + DeBERTav3-large ✓ 67.12% 65.5% - -
HuBERT-large + DeBERTav3-large ✓ - - .617 .675
HuBERT-large + DeBERTav3-large ✓ ✓ ✓ 73.92 ± 0.17% 73.01 ± 0.25% .737 ± .04 .676 ± .07
HuBERT-large + DeBERTav3-large ✓ ✓ 74.17% 72.9% - -
HuBERT-large + DeBERTav3-large ✓ ✓ - - .711 .687
HuBERT-large + DeBERTav3-large ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 74.68 ± 0.16% 74.69 ± 0.18% .738 ± .03 .685 ± .03
HuBERT-large + DeBERTav3-large ✓ ✓ ✓ 74.29% 73.6% - -
HuBERT-large + DeBERTav3-large ✓ ✓ ✓ - - .718 .686
HuBERT-large + DeBERTav3-large ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 75.71 ± 0.17% 74.6 ± 0.21% .748 ± .05 .677 ± .04
HuBERT-large + DeBERTav3-large ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 74.02% 73.05% - -
HuBERT-large + DeBERTav3-large ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ - - .714 .698
HuBERT-large + DeBERTav3-large ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 75.79 ± 0.37% 74.38 ± 0.33% .744 ± .02 .679 ± .04
Table 3: Comparing Results for dimensional Emotions. All
experiments were conducted on 5-fold. M-T means that
the respective experiment used multi-task. W AR stands for
Weighted Average Recall
Publication Acoustic Features M-T V A
Srinivasan et al. [18] wav2vec2-base .363 .728
Srinivasan et al. [18] wav2vec2-large .472 .735
Srinivasan et al. [18] HuBERT-large .485 .733
Srinivasan et al. [18] HuBERT-large .547 .752
Roshan et al. [17] ✓ .660 .717
the learnable bridge tokens can offer insight regarding the way of
how the acoustic and linguistic features can be fused together.
Unfortunately, the RMM could not improve the average perfor-
mance of our best model. However, the variance in performance
is slightly lower across the three seeds. The underperformance of
the RMM approach could be the lack of uni-modal training during
the first epochs. When the RMM is applied, only the transformer
whose modality features are masked gets its weights frozen. How-
ever, both multi-head attention layers are trained together. The
features learned while training the two multi-head attention layers
might not be beneficial for both of them. Therefore, the model could
benefit more from the RMM if the multi-head attention layers are
trained separately in the early stages. The classifier and regressor
are also trained at the same time during all epochs. A fine-tuning
epoch for both the classifier and the regressor could slightly im-
prove the results at the end of the training. Last but not least, it has
been noticed that the arousal performance downgrades in favour
of the valence, which makes us consider the implementation of
different regressors for each dimensional value.
6 CONCLUSION
To conclude, we proposed a multi-task multi-modal system for pre-
dicting the categorical and dimensional emotions in spontaneous
conversations. In our configuration, we compare our multi-task
results with the single-task ones and emphasize that the cross-
regularisation of the two tasks is beneficial for the performance of
the categorical emotions and for the valence. In our setup, our ap-
proach achieves the best results by applying two groups of learnable
bridge tokens that fuse the features of the two modalities through
the help of the multi-head attention layers. Our best performing
multi-task, multi-modal framework achieves a CCC score of .748
for valence.
Unlike the previous approaches, the performance of the valence
surpasses that of the arousal when the model complexity is in-
creased. For future work, we plan to investigate the reason why
the pattern gets inverted. Additionally, we intend to increase our
performance by implementing the suggested improvements men-
tioned in the results section. We will also dive deeper into the
learnable bridge tokens and find the optimal number of tokens for
our configuration.
7 REPRODUCIBILITY
The experiments were performed in PyTorch on two types of GPU:
RTX A6000 and Tesla V100. The training of a 10-fold lasted be-
tween 16 and 24 hours depending on the number of epochs and

A Multi-Task, Multi-Modal Approach for Predicting Categorical and Dimensional Emotions
the chosen GPU. In order to ensure reproducibility, all experiments
were conducted on the same seed and were prevented from using
non-deterministic algorithms. The multi-task experiments were
validated by calculating the average of three distinct seeds. In order
to reproduce our experiments, use the seeds 1,2 and 3 for both the
CUDA and CPU versions of PyTorch. At the same time, set the
PyTorch CuDNN to deterministic.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Emmet Strickland for their assistance in
proofreading this paper. His careful review and feedback were
invaluable in improving the clarity and correctness of our work.
REFERENCES
[1] Arya Aftab, Alireza Morsali, Shahrokh Ghaemmaghami, and Benoit Champagne.
2022. LIGHT-SERNET: A lightweight fully convolutional neural network for
speech emotion recognition. In ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) . IEEE, 6912–6916.
[2] Nikolaos Antoniou, Athanasios Katsamanis, Theodoros Giannakopoulos, and
Shrikanth Narayanan. 2023. Designing and Evaluating Speech Emotion Recogni-
tion Systems: A reality check case study with IEMOCAP. In ICASSP 2023-2023
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) .
IEEE, 1–5.
[3] Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. 2020.
wav2vec 2.0: A framework for self-supervised learning of speech representations.
Advances in neural information processing systems 33 (2020), 12449–12460.
[4] Carlos Busso, Murtaza Bulut, Chi-Chun Lee, Abe Kazemzadeh, Emily Mower,
Samuel Kim, Jeannette N Chang, Sungbok Lee, and Shrikanth S Narayanan. 2008.
IEMOCAP: Interactive emotional dyadic motion capture database. Language
resources and evaluation 42 (2008), 335–359.
[5] Xingyu Cai, Jiahong Yuan, Renjie Zheng, Liang Huang, and Kenneth Church.
2021. Speech emotion recognition with multi-task learning.. In Interspeech,
Vol. 2021. 4508–4512.
[6] Shizhe Chen, Qin Jin, Jinming Zhao, and Shuai Wang. 2017. Multimodal multi-
task learning for dimensional and continuous emotion recognition. InProceedings
of the 7th Annual Workshop on Audio/Visual Emotion Challenge . 19–26.
[7] Théo Deschamps-Berger, Lori Lamel, and Laurence Devillers. 2021. End-to-
end speech emotion recognition: challenges of real-life emergency call centers
data recordings. In 2021 9th International Conference on Affective Computing and
Intelligent Interaction (ACII). IEEE, 1–8.
[8] Théo Deschamps-Berger, Lori Lamel, and Laurence Devillers. 2023. Exploring At-
tention Mechanisms for Multimodal Emotion Recognition in an Emergency Call
Center Corpus. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) . IEEE, 1–5.
[9] Paul Ekman. 1992. An argument for basic emotions. Cognition & emotion 6, 3-4
(1992), 169–200.
[10] Han Feng, Sei Ueno, and Tatsuya Kawahara. 2020. End-to-End Speech Emotion
Recognition Combined with Acoustic-to-Word ASR Model.. In Interspeech. 501–
505.
[11] Yajing Feng and Laurence Devillers. 2023. End-to-End Continuous Speech
Emotion Recognition in Real-life Customer Service Call Center Conversations.
Workshop on addressing social context in affective computing (ASOCA) at ACII2023
(accepted paper) (2023).
[12] Pengcheng He, Jianfeng Gao, and Weizhu Chen. 2021. Debertav3: Improving
deberta using electra-style pre-training with gradient-disentangled embedding
sharing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.09543 (2021).
[13] Wei-Ning Hsu, Benjamin Bolte, Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Kushal Lakhotia, Ruslan
Salakhutdinov, and Abdelrahman Mohamed. 2021. Hubert: Self-supervised
speech representation learning by masked prediction of hidden units. IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing 29 (2021), 3451–3460.
[14] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A method for stochastic opti-
mization. ICLR (2015).
[15] James A Russell and Albert Mehrabian. 1977. Evidence for a three-factor theory
of emotions. Journal of research in Personality 11, 3 (1977), 273–294.
[16] Meysam Shamsi and Marie Tahon. 2022. Training speech emotion classifier
without categorical annotations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07642 (2022).
[17] Roshan Sharma, Hira Dhamyal, Bhiksha Raj, and Rita Singh. 2022. Unifying the
Discrete and Continuous Emotion labels for Speech Emotion Recognition. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2210.16642 (2022).
[18] Sundararajan Srinivasan, Zhaocheng Huang, and Katrin Kirchhoff. 2022. Repre-
sentation learning through cross-modal conditional teacher-student training for
speech emotion recognition. In ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) . IEEE, 6442–6446.
[19] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017).
[20] Johannes Wagner, Andreas Triantafyllopoulos, Hagen Wierstorf, Maximilian
Schmitt, Felix Burkhardt, Florian Eyben, and Björn W Schuller. 2023. Dawn of
the transformer era in speech emotion recognition: closing the valence gap.IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2023).
[21] Suzhen Wang, Yifeng Ma, and Yu Ding. 2023. Exploring Complementary Features
in Multi-Modal Speech Emotion Recognition. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) . IEEE,
1–5.
[22] Yingzhi Wang, Abdelmoumene Boumadane, and Abdelwahab Heba. 2021. A fine-
tuned wav2vec 2.0/hubert benchmark for speech emotion recognition, speaker
verification and spoken language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02735
(2021).
[23] Rui Xia and Yang Liu. 2015. A multi-task learning framework for emotion
recognition using 2D continuous space. IEEE Transactions on affective computing
8, 1 (2015), 3–14.
[24] Heqing Zou, Yuke Si, Chen Chen, Deepu Rajan, and Eng Siong Chng. 2022. Speech
emotion recognition with co-attention based multi-level acoustic information. In
ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 7367–7371.